American Association of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgeons’ Position Paper
on Medication-Related Osteonecrosis
of the Jaws—2022 Update
Salvatore L. Ruggiero, DMD, MD,* Thomas B. Dodson, DMD, MPH,y
Tara Aghaloo, DDS, MD, PhD,z Eric R. Carlson, DMD, MD, EdM,x
Brent B. Ward, DDS, MD,k and Deepak Kademani, DMD, MD{
Strategies for management of patients with, or at risk for, medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws
(MRONJ) – formerly referred to as bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws (BRONJ)—were set
forth in the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons (AAOMS) position papers in 2007,
2009 and 2014. The position papers were developed by a committee appointed by the AAOMS Board
of Trustees and comprising clinicians with extensive experience in caring for these patients, as well as clinical and basic science researchers. The knowledge base and experience in addressing MRONJ continues to
evolve and expand, necessitating modifications and refinements to the previous position papers. Three
members of the AAOMS Committee on Oral, Head, and Neck Oncologic and Reconstructive Surgery (COHNORS) and three authors of the 2014 position paper were appointed to serve as a working group to analyze
the current literature and revise the guidance as indicated to reflect current knowledge in this field. This
update contains revisions to diagnosis and management strategies and highlights the current research status. AAOMS maintains that it is vitally important for this information to be disseminated to other relevant
healthcare professionals and organizations.
Ó 2022 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
J Oral Maxillofac Surg 80:920-943, 2022
Medications prescribed for dental and medical conditions have potential side effects that warrant a riskbenefit discussion. Where therapeutic margins are

wide and complications are readily corrected, decisions are implemented in a straightforward fashion.
Where therapeutic margins are wide but

*Clinical Professor, Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery,

Private practice, Minnesota Oral and Facial Surgery and Minnesota

Stony Brook School of Dental Medicine, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ

Head and Neck Surgery, Minneapolis, Minn.

School of Medicine, New York Center for Orthognathic and

Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Ruggiero serves as a consul-

Maxillofacial Surgery, Lake Success, NY.

tant for Amgen. Dr Dodson serves as a consultant for AAOMS. Dr

yProfessor and Chair, University of Washington School of

Aghaloo has received research grants from OMS Foundation and Am-

Dentistry, Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Seattle,
Wash.

gen. Dr Carlson receives book royalties from Wiley Blackwell, Quintessence, and Elsevier. Dr Ward serves as a consultant for AAOMS,

zProfessor, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, UCLA School of

AACMES, and OsteoScience. Dr Kademani serves as a consultant

Dentistry, Los Angeles, Calif.

for AAOMS and is the director of ABOMS.

xProfessor and Kelly L. Krahwinkel Endowed Chairman,

Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr Ruggiero:

Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of

Clinical Professor, Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Stony

Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine, Knoxville, Tenn.

Brook School of Dental Medicine, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School

kChalmers J Lyons Professor of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery,

of Medicine, New York Center for Orthognathic and Maxillofacial

Associate Professor of Dentistry, Chair of the Department of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgery/ Hospital Dentistry in the School of

Surgery, Lake Success, NY; e-mail: sruggie@optonline.net
Received December 29 2021

Dentistry and Associate Professor of Surgery for the Medical

Accepted February 15 2022

School, University of Michigan Hospital, Ann Arbor, Mich.

Ó 2022 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons

{Chief of Staff North Memorial Health, Fellowship Director, Oral/

0278-2391/22/00148-3

Head and Neck Oncologic and Reconstructive Surgery Attending

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joms.2022.02.008

Surgeon, North Memorial Health and the University of Minnesota.

920

921

RUGGIERO ET AL

complications are significant, deciding to proceed
with pharmacologic treatment becomes more challenging. In most cases of MRONJ, local therapies can
be successful. The fact that more complex treatment
is required for a few patients should not impact
decision-making for all other patients with osteonecrosis of the jaws. The medications associated with
MRONJ have proved to be safe and effective in clinical
trials and postmarketing analyses for most patients and
should continue as a mainstay therapy when indicated. Communicating the risks of MRONJ to patients
and providers is critical to ensure appropriate medical
management for the primary disease.
Undoubtedly, risk profiles may change as new medications come to market. In addition, our understanding of disease pathophysiology, risk modifiers, and
treatment strategies will continue to evolve. It is of
the utmost importance that clinicians base their patient treatment decisions on currently available scientific evidence.
Strategies for management of patients at risk for or
with MRONJ were set forth in American Association
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons (AAOMS) Position
Papers in 2007,1 2009,2 and 2014.3 These position papers were developed by a committee appointed by the
AAOMS Board of Trustees and comprised of clinicians
with extensive experience in caring for these patients,
as well as clinical and basic science researchers. The
knowledge base and experience in addressing MRONJ
continues to evolve and expand, necessitating modifications and refinements to the previously published
position papers. A working group comprised of three
members of the AAOMS Committee on Oral, Head, and
Neck Oncologic and Reconstructive Surgery (COHNORS) and three authors of the 2014 paper convened
remotely in the fall of 2020 to appraise the current
literature and revise the guidelines as indicated to
reflect the current knowledge in this field. This update
contains revisions to the pathogenesis and management strategies and highlights the current research status. AAOMS maintains it is vitally important for this
information to be disseminated to other relevant
healthcare professionals and organizations.

Purpose
The purpose of this position paper is to provide updates regarding:
1. Risk estimates for developing MRONJ.
2. Comparisons of the risks and benefits of medications related to osteonecrosis of the jaw in order
to facilitate medical decision-making for the treating physician, dentist, dental specialist, and patient with the establishment of algorithms.

3. Guidance to clinicians regarding:
a. The differential diagnosis of MRONJ in patients with a history of exposure to antiresorptive medications.
b. MRONJ prevention measures and management strategies for patients with MRONJ
based on the disease stage.

Medications
Bisphosphonates (BPs) are antiresorptive medications that are effective in managing cancer-related conditions, including hypercalcemia of malignancy, spinal
cord compression, and pathologic fractures (skeletalrelated events [SREs]) associated with bone metastases
in the context of solid tumors (such as breast, prostate,
and lung cancers) and multiple myeloma.4-13 While the
potential for BPs to improve cancer-specific survival
remains controversial, these medications have had a
significant positive effect on the quality of life for patients with advanced cancer involving the skeleton
and reducing or preventing skeletal-related events.
Bisphosphonates also are used for the prevention of
osteoporosis-related fractures (fragility fractures) in
patients with osteoporosis and osteopenia.14-16 BPs
administered orally–including alendronate (FosamaxÒ), risedronate (ActonelÒ) or parenterally (zoledronic
acid
[ReclastÒ]),
and
ibandronate
(BonivaÒ)—can result in a significant reduction in
vertebral and nonvertebral fractures for patients with
osteoporosis.17-20
Bisphosphonate therapy also is indicated for other
metabolic bone diseases such as Paget’s disease of
bone and osteogenesis imperfecta.21-23 However,
clinical trials have not demonstrated the efficacy of
bisphosphonate therapy in the management of
fibrous dysplasia.24
Denosumab (DMB), a receptor activator of nuclear
factor kappa-B ligand (RANK-L), is an antiresorptive
agent that exists as a fully humanized antibody against
RANK ligand and inhibits osteoclast function and associated bone resorption. When denosumab (ProliaÒ) is
administered subcutaneously every 6 months, there is
a significant reduction in the risk of vertebral, nonvertebral, and hip fractures in osteoporotic patients.25-28
Denosumab (XgevaÒ) also is effective in reducing
SREs related to metastatic bone disease from solid
tumors when administered monthly.29-31
RANK ligand inhibitors also have proven efficacy in
the treatment of giant cell tumors of bone and fibrous
dysplasia.32-36 In contrast to BPs, RANK-L inhibitors do
not bind to bone, and their effects on bone remodeling
are mostly diminished within 6 months of treatment cessation.

922
Romosozumab is a new monoclonal antibody used
for fracture prevention in osteoporotic women. Romosozumab, administered subcutaneously, works via the
Wnt pathway by binding to and inhibiting sclerostin,
resulting in increased bone formation and decreased
bone resorption.37

MRONJ Case Definition
MRONJ should be distinguished from other forms of
osteonecrosis (ONJ) conditions and identified by history and clinical exam. The clinical criteria required
to establish a diagnosis of MRONJ have remained unchanged from the previous position paper.3

The case definition of MRONJ includes all the
following elements:
1. Current or previous treatment with antiresorptive therapy alone or in combination with immune modulators or antiangiogenic medications.
2. Exposed bone or bone that can be probed
through an intraoral or extraoral fistula(e) in
the maxillofacial region that has persisted for
more than 8 weeks.
3. No history of radiation therapy to the jaws or
metastatic disease to the jaws.

Staging
A staging system for MRONJ was introduced in the
2009 AAOMS position paper and then modified in
the 2014 position paper to characterize more accurately all aspects of the clinical presentation of MRONJ.
Since these modifications, the AAOMS staging system
has continued to be a straightforward and relevant system to properly stratify these patients. It has been
adopted by several professional societies and research
organizations. The staging system facilitates the creation of rational treatment guidelines and guides data
collection to assess the prognosis and outcomes for
MRONJ patients. While AAOMS recognizes that
different classification systems are being used by other
organizations,38 the Association considers the AAOMS
system to be a useful and widely implemented assessment tool guiding clinicians involved in the care of
MRONJ patients.
AAOMS remains concerned that over- emphasizing
variable radiographic features often attributed to
MRONJ may overestimate the true disease
frequency by including false positives in the
numerator (eg, cases with radiographic findings suggestive of MRONJ), but these patients do not fit the
criteria for the diagnosis of MRONJ.

In the orthopedic literature, the usefulness of a
Stage 0 category has been established for staging
avascular necrosis (AVN) of the femoral head when
there is a suspicion of AVN in a pa tient at risk, but
the diagnostic information is not conclusive.39
AAOMS believes the Stage 0 category for
MRONJ is analogous in principle and does account for
the wide-ranging radiographic presentation of
MRONJ that exists prior to overt bone exposure.
Therefore, AAOMS has decided to maintain the current
classification system with no modifications.

PATIENTS AT-RISK

No apparent necrotic bone in asymptomatic patients who have been treated with IV or oral antiresorptive therapy.
STAGE 0 (NONEXPOSED BONE VARIANT)

Patients with no clinical evidence of necrotic bone
but who present with nonspecific symptoms or clinical and radiographic findings, such as:
Symptoms
 Odontalgia not explained by an odontogenic
cause.
 Dull, aching bone pain in the jaw, which may
radiate to the temporomandibular joint region.
 Sinus pain, which may be associated with inflammation and thickening of the maxillary sinus wall.
 Altered neurosensory function.

Clinical Findings
 Loosening of teeth not explained by chronic periodontal disease.
 Intraoral or extraoral swelling.

Radiographic Findings
 Alveolar bone loss or resorption not attributable
to chronic periodontal disease.
 Changes to trabecular pattern sclerotic bone and
no new bone in extraction sockets.
 Regions of osteosclerosis involving the alveolar
bone and/or the surrounding basilar bone.
 Thickening/ obscuring of periodontal ligament (
thickening of the lamina dura, sclerosis, and
decreased size of the periodontal ligament space).
40

These nonspecific findings, which characterize this
variant of MRONJ without bone exposure, may occur
in patients with a prior history of Stage 1, 2, or 3 disease who have been healed and have no clinical evidence of exposed bone. Progression to Stage 1
disease has been reported in up to 50 percent of
patients with Stage 0 disease 41 and, therefore, AAOMS
deems it prudent to consider Stage 0 disease as a potential precursor to MRONJ.

923

RUGGIERO ET AL
STAGE 1

Exposed and necrotic bone or fistula that probes to
the bone in patients who are asymptomatic and have
no evidence of infection/inflammation. These patients
also may present with radiographic findings
mentioned for Stage 0 that are localized to the alveolar
bone region.
STAGE 2

Exposed and necrotic bone, or fistula that probes to
the bone, with evidence of infection/inflammation.
These patients are symptomatic. These patients also
may present with radiographic findings mentioned
for Stage 0 localized to the alveolar bone region.
STAGE 3

Exposed and necrotic bone or fistulae that probes to
the bone, with evidence of infection, and one or more
of the following:
 Exposed necrotic bone extending beyond the region of alveolar bone (ie, inferior border and
ramus in the mandible, maxillary sinus, and
zygoma in the maxilla)
 Pathologic fracture.
 Extraoral fistula.
 Oral antral/oral-nasal communication.
 Osteolysis extending to the inferior border of the
mandible or sinus floor.

jaw necrosis in antiresorptive na€ıve patients in which
necrosis was linked to bacterial, viral, or fungal infections, trauma, smoking, steroids, immunocompromised host, autoimmune diseases, diabetes, and
Furthermore,
patient
chemotherapy.43-57
populations, such as those with osteogenesis
imperfecta have been treated with antiresorptive
agents without reports of MRONJ.58 Many patients
receiving medications associated with MRONJ have
other comorbidities, which are likely exacerbating or
contributing factors. In combination, these confounding variables make incidence and prevalence difficult
to estimate.
Clinical trials, while being the gold standard for efficacy and safety data, are seldom powered to demonstrate uncommon events. Prior to the discovery of
MRONJ, large randomized prospective trials of BPs
with up to 10 years of patient data did not reveal any
jaw bone necrosis as a complication.17,59 More
recently, the HORIZON Pivotal Fracture trial tested
3,889 randomized patients given annual zoledronic
acid versus placebo for 3 years; one patient developed
MRONJ in the intervention group and one in the placebo group.18 Extension of this trial for up to 6 years
resulted in one additional MRONJ patient in the treatment group.60 Extension to 9 years resulted in no additional confirmed cases of MRONJ.61
Definitive causality, taken as a whole, remains a difficult task to prove in general, let alone in individual patients presenting with clinical symptoms. Clinicians
should be aware of these facts in decisions regarding
treatment recommendations.

CAUSALITY

It is important to understand that patients at risk for
or with established MRONJ also can present with
other common clinical conditions not to be confused
with MRONJ. Commonly misdiagnosed conditions
may include but are not limited to alveolar osteitis,
sinusitis, gingivitis/periodontitis, caries, periapical pathology, odontalgia, atypical neuralgias, fibro-osseous
lesions, sarcoma, chronic sclerosing osteomyelitis,
and temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorders. It also
is important to remember that delayed healing,
exposed bone or sequestra (ie, osteonecrosis [ONJ]),
can occur in patients not exposed to antiresorptive agents.42
Proving causality of any medication-related complication is challenging from an epidemiologic perspective. It is well-known that MRONJ is a rare entity,
multifactorial in nature, and patients with the same
clinical presentation exist who have not been exposed
to an antiresorptive medication. Studies have reported

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Since the AAOMS position paper in 2014, significant
knowledge has been gained regarding MRONJ pathophysiology from both clinical and particularly preclinical animal studies. It should be noted that animal
studies have a number of limitations, are most often using supratherapeutic doses and likely do not truly
mirror the clinical environment. That said, they are
critical in understanding disease mechanisms and
can serve as one reference point to evidence-based
clinical decision-making.
Much debate persists among clinicians and researchers, contributing to the various treatment protocols utilized for patients today.62-65 Disease specificity
unique to the jaws has focused leading hypotheses to
include bone remodeling inhibition, inflammation or
infection, angiogenesis inhibition, innate or acquired
immune dysfunction, as well as genetic
predisposition.3,65 Both animal and human studies
suggest that an antiresorptive medication, coupled
with inflammation or infection, is necessary and

924
sufficient to induce MRONJ. However, as more knowledge is gained on the subject, it is becoming increasingly apparent that MRONJ is multifactorial, and it is
likely that multiple hypotheses can explain the overall
pathophysiology of this disease.3,65
Bone Remodeling Inhibition
The definition of MRONJ includes oral or parenteral
administration of antiresorptive medications, such
that bone remodeling suppression is a central hypothesis in its pathophysiology. Antiresorptive medications, including BPs and denosumab (DMB), have
direct effects on osteoclast formation, differentiation,
or function. In osteoporosis, BPs are a first-line therapy
to decrease bone remodeling, increase bone mineral
density, and decrease vertebral and long bone fractures.66,67 BPs, in higher doses, also are utilized in primary bone malignancy and bone metastases to
decrease SREs, including hypercalcemia of malignancy, reduce severe bone pain, and improve quality
of life.68-72 Although DMB has only been approved
for use since 2010, its use has increased significantly
for both osteoporosis and malignancy in the last
decade. Prevalence of MRONJ with DMB users is at
least as high as BP users, likely due to its increased
potency to inhibit bone resorption.30,73-75 This is
supported in the jaws as animal studies demonstrate
absent osteoclasts around the alveolar bone of DMBtreated mice.76 Human bone specimens also show an
increased number of nonfunctional osteoclasts surrounding necrotic bone in BP-treated patients,77
further reinforcing bone remodeling inhibition as a
leading hypothesis in MRONJ pathophysiology. With
the appearance of MRONJ in DMB-treated patients, it
becomes increasingly apparent that the underlying
pathophysiology involves dysfunctional osteoclasts.
Animal studies evaluating withdrawal of BPs or DMB
further highlight the importance of bone remodeling
in MRONJ prevention and resolution. Rodents with established ONJ failed to resolve when antiresorptive
were withdrawn. However, discontinuing DMB, but
not BPs, prior to tooth extraction successfully prevented MRONJ development in rats.78,79 Moreover,
parathyroid hormone, which acts directly on osteoblasts to induce bone formation and indirectly increases osteoclastic bone resorption and overall
remodeling, has been shown to prevent MRONJ and
improve extraction socket healing in rodents and preliminarily in patients.80-82 This observation provides
further support for the central role of osteoclast
inhibition in MRONJ pathogenesis.
Inflammation or Infection
Although most studies report tooth extraction as the
major inciting event for MRONJ development, it is
clear that most extracted teeth had pre-existing peri-

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE

odontal or periapical disease.3,64,83,84 From this patient information, animal models of inflammation or
infection were developed to replicate clinical, radiographic, and histologic features of MRONJ.85-88
Presence of inflammatory cytokines, specifically at
the site of MRONJ, also support the strong role of
inflammation.89 As evidence of increased systemic
inflammation and its contribution to MRONJ development, mice with experimentally induced rheumatoid
arthritis demonstrated more severe MRONJ with
increased oral bone exposure, more pronounced
radiographic features, intense local inflammatory infiltrate, and larger areas of histologic necrosis.90 Further
support for the inflammatory etiology showed that
removal of the inflammatory nidus in ligatureinduced periodontitis ameliorated MRONJ development in mice, demonstrating reduced inflammation
and prevention of disease progression.91 Moreover,
transplantation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells
with anti-inflammatory properties reduced MRONJ
prevalence by improving soft-tissue healing,
decreasing inflammatory polymorphonuclear cells
and inflammatory marker expression, as well as
enhancing vascularity.92 These preclinical findings
confirm the irrefutable role of inflammation or infection in MRONJ disease prevalence, severity and
resolution.
The presence of bacteria on the exposed necrotic
bone also contributes to disease severity, where pain
and signs of infection define Stage 2 MRONJ.3,93,94
This is not surprising since poor oral hygiene and biofilm presence are associated with MRONJ development,95,96 and oral health maintenance and dental
prophylaxis before initiating antiresorptive therapy
can decrease MRONJ prevalence.97,98 Importantly,
clinical treatment protocols to reduce the biofilm
and eradicate infection have emerged as important alternatives to debridement and resection in patients
who may not be ideal surgical candidates.63
Angiogenesis Inhibition
Osteonecrosis is traditionally defined as avascular
necrosis or aseptic necrosis, most commonly characterized as osteocyte death after decreased blood flow
to the femoral head.99 However, MRONJ is defined as
necrotic bone in the maxillofacial region after exposure to either antiresorptive or antiangiogenic medications.3 BPs such as zoledronic acid directly inhibit
angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo100-103 and animal
models demonstrate decreased vascularity in sites of
MRONJ and decreased microvessel numbers during
early stages of bone healing.104 In addition, angiogenesis normally seen during extraction socket healing
is inhibited by BPs, and both BPs and DMB have
been shown to decrease arterial area, venous area,
and overall vascularity of periodontal tissues during

925

RUGGIERO ET AL

early and late MRONJ development.105,106 Importantly, antiangiogenic medications, such as VEGF inhibitors, tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitors, and
immunomodulatory drugs,107-109 can be associated
with MRONJ. Moreover, patients with multiple
myeloma receiving both antiresorptive and
antiangiogenic medications, as shown in several
studies,110-114 have a higher MRONJ prevalence.
Important aspects of MRONJ treatment include
determining disease margins, which can be
challenging as microvascular mucosal abnormalities
can be seen adjacent to frank MRONJ lesions.115 It is
important to note that the incidence of MRONJ in patients on antiangiogenics is much lower than those taking antiresorptive medications.
Innate or Acquired Immune Dysfunction
Although animal studies confirm that an antiresorptive medication—coupled with inflammation or infection—is necessary and sufficient to produce MRONJ,
not all patients with dental infections develop the disease. It is well-known that patients with medical comorbidities such as diabetes or rheumatoid arthritis
or immunocompromised states are at significantly
higher risk for MRONJ with or without exposure to
antiresorptive agents.3,64,114,116 Patients with metastatic or primary bone malignancies have a compromised
immune system.117 This also has been confirmed with
animal studies, where chemotherapy, steroids, and
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs),
combined with antiangiogenic medications and an
antiresorptive, increase MRONJ severity or prevalence.118-120 Moreover, higher rates of MRONJ occur
in patients with multiple myeloma who receive
multiple chemotherapeutic agents.110,121
Replenishing the area of nonhealing MRONJ lesions
with mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to overcome immune dysfunction is a potential area of therapeutic interest,
especially
in
patients
who
are
immunocompromised. A recent study showed altered
numbers and patterns of T-cells in human and rat
MRONJ necrotic bone samples as compared to healthy
patients and non-MRONJ sites.122 Preclinical studies
also demonstrate healing or prevention of MRONJ lesions after systemic infusion with adipose or bone
marrow-derived MSCs.123-125
Genetic Factors
In the 2014 paper, the authors identified several reports describing single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) that were associated with the development of
MRONJ. Most of these SNPs were located within regions of the gene associated with either bone turnover,
collagen formation, or certain metabolic bone diseases. Indeed, increasing evidence is available to
support the role of SNPs with MRONJ.126,127 Specific

links to sirtuin-1 (SIRT1), a bone remodeling regulator
that promotes bone formation, may be protective
against MRONJ if upregulated.128 SIRT1 also is
involved in both reduction of inflammation and induction of angiogenesis, suggesting a role in several of the
leading MRONJ hypotheses.128 Other genes also have
been reported to increase MRONJ risk through their
role in angiogenesis, bone remodeling, and immune
responses, including PPAR gamma, CYP2C8, and
many others.129 Collectively, these studies suggest
that MRONJ is a multifactorial disease and that genetic
factors may play a role in its development.130 Overall,
however, current studies document either a weak or
no association between genetic factors measured
and risk for MRONJ.131 To determine predisposition,
studies with larger sample sizes should be performed,
with genetic risks confirmed in both BPs and DMBtreated patients who have breast or prostate cancer
metastases, multiple myeloma, or osteoporosis.

Risk Factors for MRONJ
MEDICATION-RELATED RISK FACTORS

To estimate the risk for medications associated with
MRONJ, the primary parameter to be considered is the
therapeutic indication for treatment (eg, malignancy or
osteoporosis/osteopenia). The data suggest that antiresorptive medications (ie, BPs and DMB) are associated
with an increased risk for developing MRONJ. The risk
of MRONJ is considerably higher in the malignancy
group (<5%) than in the osteoporosis group
(<0.05%). Current data are insufficient to identify other
medications as risk factors for developing MRONJ.
MRONJ risk among cancer patients
For estimating the risk for MRONJ among patients
exposed to a medication, the risk for MRONJ in patients not exposed to antiresorptive medications
must be estimated (Table 1). The risk for MRONJ
among cancer patients enrolled in clinical trials and assigned to placebo groups ranges from 0 percent to 0.7
percent.132-138
a. Among cancer patients exposed to zoledronate,
the cumulative risk of MRONJ clusters in the
low single digits, <5 percent, and ranges from
0 percent to 18 percent.113,132,133,137-144 The
wide variation in estimates may be explained by
the varying durations of follow-up, one to
10 years, reported in the various studies. The
risk of MRONJ among cancer patients exposed
to zoledronate ranges between 2-10 times higher
than cancer patients treated with placebo.
b. Among cancer patients exposed to DMB, the risk
of MRONJ ranges from 0 percent to 6.9 percent,
with most studies reporting rates <5

926

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE

Table 1. MRONJ DISEASE FREQUENCY GROUPED BY INDICATIONS FOR TREATMENT VERSUS MEDICATION*

Medication
Indications for
Treatment
Malignancy
Coleman (2020)138
O’Carrigan et al,
(2017)137
O’Carrigan et al,
(2017)137
Macherey et al,
(2017)136
Gnant et al,
(2015)247
Coleman et al,
(2014)133
Valachis et al,
(2013)132
Boquete-Castro
et al, (2016)135
Coleman (2020)138
Gnant et al,
(2015)247
Raje et al, (2018)113
Himelstein
(2017)140
Henry (2014)141
Yang et al,
(2019)248
Peddi et al,
(2013)142
Ng et al, (2021)145

Placebo

Zoledronate

0.2% (2,218)*
0.7% (6,788)
0% (3,060)

Oral BPs

Denosumab Romosozumab

5% (2,241)
0.4% (6,788)
1% (3,078)

Study Design

RCTy
Systematic review
Systematic review

0.7% (818)

1.5% (808)

Systematic review

0% (903)

0% (900)

RCT

0% (1,679)

1.7% (1,681)

RCT

0% (3,039) 0.52% (4,774)
0.1%

1.14%

Systemic review
1.7%

Systematic review

5.4% (2,214)
0% (1,711)

RCT
RCT

2.8% (82)
1.5% (1,822)

4.1% (850)

RCT
RCT

1.1% (786)
2% (8,525)

0.8% (792)

RCT
Systematic review

1.3% (2,846)

1.8% (2,885)

Systematic review

1.6-4%z
3.8-18%x
1.4% (1,013)

1.9%z
6.9%x
2% (1,020)

Systematic review

0.2% (2,218)
0% (1,709)

Wang et al,
Systematic review
(2014)144
Osteoporosis
Papapoulos et al,
0% (3,383)
0.04% (4,549)
RCT
(2012)26
0.02% (4,945) 0.02% (5,864)
Systematic review
Grbic et al,
(2010)150
Cosman et al,
0% (3,322)
0.03% (3,321)
RCT
(2016)151
0.05% (2,047)
0.05% (2,046)
RCT
Saag et al, (2017)37
Bone et al,
0.3% (2,343)
RCT
(2017)153
10-yr f/u
Hallmer et al,
0.043%
Population study (50,000)
(2018)75
Nonmalignant bone
disease
Chawla et al,
5% (532)
Prospective case series
(2019)156
0.7% (138)
Retrospective case series
Rutkowski155
* Sample size in parentheses
y Randomized clinical trial.
z <2 years of follow-up.
x >2 years of follow-up.
Ruggiero et al. AAOMS’ Position Paper on MRONJ—2022 Update. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022.

927

RUGGIERO ET AL

percent.113,134,135,138,141,142,144,145 The risk for
MRONJ among cancer patients exposed to DMB
is comparable to the risk of MRONJ in cancer patients exposed to zoledronate.135,141,142,144,145
Since the 2014 update, investigators have implicated numerous families of medications as risk factors
for MRONJ.146-149 These medications include tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as sunitinib, monoclonal
antibodies
(bevacizumab),
fusion
proteins
(aflibercept),
mTOR
inhibitors
(everolimus),
radiopharmaceuticals (radium 223), selective
estrogen receptor modulators (raloxifene), and
immunosuppressants
(methotrexate
and
corticosteroids).
When compared to antiresorptive medications, the
level of evidence supporting other medication families
as risk factors for MRONJ is level 5 (eg, isolated case reports or mini-case series [<5 cases]).146-149 Given that
the poly-pharmaceutical management of cancer patients combined with the fact that cancer and immunosuppression are risk factors for MRONJ without
exposure to antiresorptive agents, AAOMS believes
that identifying a single medication as being the etiologic agent for MRONJ seems unlikely in case reports
or mini-case series. Further controlled prospective
studies will be required to measure the risk of MRONJ
associated with non-antiresorptive agents.
MRONJ Risk Among Osteoporosis Patients
Most dentists and oral and maxillofacial surgeons
evaluate patients in their practices exposed to antiresorptive therapy for management of osteoporosis (Table 1).
a. Risk for MRONJ among osteoporotic patients
exposed to BPs.
The risk of MRONJ among study subjects assigned to
placebo groups enrolled in osteoporosis clinical trials
ranged from 0 percent to 0.02 percent.26,150,151 Among
study subjects treated with BPs, the risk of MRONJ is
0.02 percent to 0.05 percent.37,75,152 Among patients
exposed to IV zoledronate, the risk for MRONJ is estimated to be #0.02% (# 2 per 10,000). For patients
exposed to oral bisphosphonates, MRONJ risk is estimated to be #0.05% (# 5 per 10,000).
b. MRONJ risk among osteoporotic
exposed to RANK-L inhibitors.

patients

After 10 years of follow-up, among patients exposed
to DMB, the risk for MRONJ was reported to be 0.3
percent, almost an order of magnitude higher than
for BPs.153

c. The risk for MRONJ when exposed to romosozumab (0.03 percent to 0.05 percent) is comparable
to alendronate (0.05 percent).37,151 In the placebo group, there were no cases of MRONJ.151
It will be important to continue to monitor romosozumab to assess its role as a risk factor for
MRONJ.
The risk for MRONJ among osteoporosis patients
treated with BPs ranges from 0.02 percent to 0.05
percent and overlaps the risk for MRONJ of patients
enrolled in placebo groups (0 percent to 0.02
percent). The risk for MRONJ among patients treated
with denosumab, however, has a larger range—from
0.04 percent to 0.3 percent. As such, additional
research will be needed to better estimate the risk of
MRONJ among patients receiving denosumab. The
risk of MRONJ for patients exposed to romosozumab
(0.03 percent to 0.05 percent) more closely aligns
with the risk associated with BPs.37,151 However, given
its recent introduction as a therapeutic agent, additional research will be needed to refine its association
and risk estimate for MRONJ.
Based on this current review of data, the risk of
developing MRONJ among osteoporotic patients
exposed to BPs, DMB, and romosozumab is low. The
occurrence of cases seen is best explained by a rare
event among a large number of patients, 5.1 million
over the age of 55, exposed to these drugs.154
MRONJ Risk Among Patients with Nonmalignant
Bone Disease
a. AAOMS identified two studies where DMB was
used to manage aggressive giant cell tumors of
bone.155,156 The risk of developing MRONJ in
the two studies was broad and ranged from 0.7
percent to 5 percent. This is comparable to the
risks of developing MRONJ in subjects treated
with DMB for malignancies (range = 0 percent
to 6.9 percent). Additional studies will be needed
to confirm the risk estimate for MRONJ among
patients with nonmalignant bone disease treated
with antiresorptives.
b. There are very limited data describing the occurrence of MRONJ in the pediatric population for
osteogenesis imperfecta and other conditions.
In a systematic review estimating the risk of
MRONJ among children with osteogenesis imperfecta, there were no cases of MRONJ identified in
a sample of 486 subjects treated for 4.5 to
6.8 years.157 In a different systematic review
that estimated the risk for MRONJ among those
under the age of 24 for several conditions treated
using BPs, no cases of MRONJ were reported.158

928

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE

The overall quality of the studies included in both
systematic reviews was limited by small sample
sizes or lack of MRONJ-related risk factors.

Duration of Medication Therapy as a Risk Factor
for MRONJ
Regardless of indications for therapy, the duration
of antiresorptive therapy is a risk factor for developing
MRONJ. Among cancer patients exposed to zoledronate or DMB (n = 5,723), the risk of developing
MRONJ was, respectively, 0.5 percent and 0.8 percent
at 1 year, 1.0 percent and 1.8 percent at 2 years, and
1.3 percent and 1.8 percent at 3 years.141 In a study
by Saad et al, the investigators combined threeblinded phase three trials and found similar results,
including a plateau after 2 years for patients exposed
to DMB.5 In a more recent systematic review by Ng
et al, the risk of MRONJ among cancer patients treated
with zoledronate, was 1.6 percent to 4 percent after
2 years of treatment and 3.8 percent to 18 percent
with more than 2 years of treatment.145 Likewise, for
DMB, the risks for developing MRONJ were 1.9
percent and 6.9 percent with <24 months and
>24 months of exposure, respectively.145
For patients receiving bisphosphonate therapy to
manage osteoporosis, data regarding duration are
mixed. Early on, the prevalence of MRONJ was reported as increasing over time from near 0 percent
at baseline to 0.21 percent after four or more years
of BP exposure based on retrospective analysis.152,159
More recent data from a large prospective, randomized
placebo controlled trial demonstrate no significant increase in MRONJ in patients treated for up to
9 years.18,60,61 In addition, there are no postmarketing
data or general clinical experience to support an
MRONJ prevalence of 0.21 percent in any
osteoporosis-treated group. Therefore, while duration
may be a risk factor, the overall risk remains low.
LOCAL FACTORS

Dentoalveolar Operations
Dentoalveolar operations are the most common
identifiable predisposing factor for developing
MRONJ. Several studies report that among patients
with MRONJ, tooth extraction is cited as a predisposing event ranging from 62 percent to 82
percent.5,75,160 While this information is important,
it is not what most patients or clinicians want to
know. Most providers and patients want an answer
to the following clinical question: ‘‘Among patients
exposed to antiresorptive medications, what is the
risk for developing MRONJ following tooth extraction (or other dentoalveolar procedures such as
implant placement or periodontal procedures)?’’ Cur-

rent estimates for the risk of MRONJ among osteoporotic patients exposed to BPs following tooth
extraction range from 0 percent to 0.15
percent.161,162 For osteoporotic patients exposed to
DMB, the risk for MRONJ following tooth extraction
was 1 percent.163
For cancer patients exposed to BPs, the risk of developing MRONJ after tooth extraction ranges from 1.6
percent to 14.8 percent.164-166 In a small case series,
n = 61 subjects having 102 extractions, the risk for
MRONJ after tooth extraction was 13.1 percent.167
In a systematic review by Gaudin et al, the risk for
MRONJ after tooth extraction (n = 564) was estimated
to be 3.2 percent.162 While the estimates for developing MRONJ in high-risk patients undergoing tooth
extraction vary, they cluster between 1 percent and
5 percent, similar to estimates of osteoradionecrosis
following tooth extraction in irradiated patients.
The risk of developing MRONJ among patients
who have been exposed to antiresorptive medications for other dentoalveolar operations such as
dental implant placement and endodontic or periodontal procedures is unknown.168 The risk for
MRONJ after implant placement among patients
treated with DMB has been reported to be 0.5
percent.163 Absent better data, AAOMS cautions the
use of these procedures in cancer patients exposed
to antiresorptive therapies and recommends osteoporosis patients be informed of potential risks, albeit
low, including development of MRONJ, early and
late implant failure all of which have been described
in case reports and clinical trials.
Anatomic Factors
Limited new information regarding anatomic risk
factors for MRONJ is available. MRONJ is more likely
to appear in the mandible (75 percent) than the
maxilla (25 percent) but can appear in both jaws
(4.5 percent).5,75 Denture use was associated with
an increased risk for MRONJ among cancer patients
exposed to zoledronate (OR = 4.9; 95 percent
CI = 1.2 to 20.1).169 In a study by Vahtsevanos et al,
a sample of 1,621 cancer patients treated with intravenous zoledronate, ibandronate or pamidronate, there
was a two-fold increased risk for MRONJ among denture wearers.170
Concomitant Oral Disease
Pre-existing inflammatory dental disease such as
periodontal disease or periapical pathology is cited
as a risk factor.75,168 Among cancer patients with
MRONJ, the pre-existing inflammatory dental disease
was a risk factor among 50 percent of the cases.5,165
Given that a common treatment of inflammatory
dental disease is tooth extraction, pre-existing dental
disease may confound the relationship between tooth

929

RUGGIERO ET AL

extraction and risk for MRONJ. Tooth extraction may
expose MRONJ as opposed to being the precipitating
event. It would be valuable to see an estimate of the association between tooth extraction and MRONJ
adjusted for pre-existing inflammatory dental disease.
After tooth extraction and periodontal disease, the
next most common risk factor is reported as ‘‘spontaneous’’ MRONJ with no identifiable dental
risk factor.168
DEMOGRAPHIC AND SYSTEMIC FACTORS AND
OTHER MEDICATIONS

Age and sex are variably reported as risk factors for
MRONJ.5,165,169-171 The higher prevalence of MRONJ
in the female population is likely a reflection of the
underlying disease for which the agents are being
prescribed (eg, osteoporosis, breast cancer).
As noted previously, those under the age of 24
treated with antiresorptives for benign bone diseases
have not demonstrated any risk for MRONJ even after
an extended duration of therapy. The overall quality of
the studies included even in systematic reviews is
based on small sample sizes and the lack of other
MRONJ-related risk factors. The risk of developing
MRONJ in the pediatric population requires continued
surveillance.
Corticosteroids are associated with an increased risk
for MRONJ.5,168,171 There are concerns that corticosteroids increase the risk for MRONJ when given in
conjunction with antiresporptive agents.
Comorbid conditions are inconsistently reported to
be associated with an increased risk for MRONJ,
including anemia (hemoglobin < 10 g/dL) and diabetes.5,171 Cancer type also is variably reported as a
risk factor.170,172
Tobacco use is variably reported as a risk factor for
MRONJ. In a case-control study, tobacco use approached statistical significance as a risk factor for
MRONJ in cancer patients (OR = 3.0; 95 percent
CI = 0.8 to 10.4).169 In a more recent case-controlled
study, tobacco use was not associated with ONJ in a
sample of cancer patients exposed to zolendronate.171
Vahtsevanos did not report an association between tobacco use and MRONJ.170
In brief, after chemotherapy and corticosteroid
exposure, the next most reported comorbidity is ‘‘no
comorbidity.’’168
In summary, the current literature reaffirms that the
risk of MRONJ is significantly greater in cancer patients receiving antiresorptive therapy compared to
patients receiving antiresorptive therapy for osteoporosis. Moreover, the risk of MRONJ in osteoporosis patients receiving antiresorptive therapy continues to be
very low regardless of drug type (BPs, DMB, romoszumab) or dosing schedule.

Management Strategies
TREATMENT GOALS

The major goals of treatment for patients at risk of
developing or who have established MRONJ are:
 Prevention of MRONJ (see section MRONJ risk
among cancer patients below).
 Prioritization and support of continued oncologic
treatment in patients receiving antiresorptive
therapy alone or in combination with immune
modulators or antiangiogenic medications:
B Oncology patients benefit from the therapeutic
effect of antiresorptive therapy by controlling
bone pain and reducing the incidence of other
SREs.
 Prioritization and support of continued bone
health and the prevention of fragility fractures
B Patients with osteoporosis, osteopenia, and
other metabolic bone diseases benefit from
antiresorptive therapy by significantly reducing
the risk of fragility fractures and other skeletalrelated events.
 Preservation of quality of life through:
B Patient education and reassurance.
B Control of pain.
B Control of secondary infection.
B Prevention of extension of lesion and development of new areas of necrosis.

PREVENTION OF MRONJ

Numerous studies demonstrate potentially modifiable factors for reducing the risk of MRONJ, including
performing high-risk surgical procedures prior to initiating therapy,95,173-175 using preoperative and
postoperative antibiotics and antimicrobial mouth
rinses,174,176-180
primarily closing extractions
sites,176-178
and
maintaining
good
oral
hygiene.95,166,176,177,181 Maximizing overall patient
health is always indicated, such as smoking cessation
and diabetes optimization. Although no individual
strategy nor collection of strategies eliminates all
MRONJ risks, these preventive procedures are
recommended.
The prevention of MRONJ begins with the realization that patients receiving antiresorptive therapies
may have altered osseous wound-healing capacity,
which may also be a risk for developing MRONJ.
Similar to other common preventive strategies in medicine and dentistry, healthcare providers need to
recognize the importance of coordinated dental care
and pretreatment management in minimizing the
risk of MRONJ. This requires a continuous effort to
educate patients, dentists, and medical professionals

930
about the real risks associated with these therapies and
clinical prevention paradigms that can mitigate
MRONJ development.
AAOMS re-emphasizes the importance of a multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of patients who
are receiving antiresorptive therapies. This may also
apply to other immune modulators or targeted therapies taken alone or in combination with antiresorptives. This approach includes consultation with an
appropriate dental professional when it is determined
a patient would benefit from these therapies.
Optimization of Oral Health
The 2014 AAOMS position paper identified valid
prophylactic treatment strategies that reduce the incidence of MRONJ. The efficacies of these strategies
remain validated by subsequent studies that demonstrate the importance of pretreatment dental
screening and regimented dental surveillance. There
is a robust level of support for early screening and initiation of appropriate dental care prior to the initiation
of antiresorptive therapy.38,182-186
These preventive management strategies not only
decrease the risk for MRONJ but accrue the benefits
that all patients enjoy with optimum oral health.186-193
In a prospective study of prostate cancer patients
with bone metastasis, instituting a more regimented
dental health surveillance system resulted in a 2.5fold reduction in relative risk compared to symptomatically driven dental treatment.186 In a systematic review aimed at identifying prevention strategies
associated with tooth extractions in patients at risk
for MRONJ, no randomized clinical trials were reported.194 However, there are many animal studies
that demonstrate that periodontal or periapical inflammation plays a key role in creating a local environment
that supports the development of bone necrosis in the
context of systemic antiresorptive therapy.85,91,195,196
Treatment planning for patients at risk of developing MRONJ should include a thorough examination
of the oral cavity and a radiographic assessment when
indicated. It is important to identify both acute infection and sites of potential infection to prevent future
sequelae that could be exacerbated once drug therapies begin. Considerations during the clinical and
radiographic assessment include patient motivation,
patient education regarding dental care, fluoride application, chlorhexidine rinses, tooth mobility, periodontal disease, presence of root fragments, caries,
periapical pathology, edentulism, and denture
stability.197
An additional benefit of early dental consultation,
when the use of antiresorptive therapy is being
considered, is that the patient is informed of the
risk associated with these drug therapies and the
risk incurred by not undergoing recommended

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE

dental preventive measures before consenting
to treatment.
Cessation of At-Risk Medication Therapy (Drug
Holiday) Prior to Tooth Extraction or Other Procedures that Involve Osseous Injury (eg, Dental
Implant Placement, Periodontal or Apical Endodontic Treatment)
The clinical practice of antiresorptive drug holidays
to mitigate MRONJ risk in patients undergoing dentoalveolar surgery was controversial at the time of the previous AAOMS position paper in 2014 and remained the
case in 2021. While the practice of a drug holiday has
been accepted and recommended by several international professional societies,3,38,182,183,198 the evidence to support or refute such positions remains
inconclusive. The difficulty in establishing or refuting
the efficacy of drug holidays is due to the rarity of
MRONJ in these patient populations. Therefore, since
few events are reported, randomized-controlled trials
provide insufficient data to create sound treatment
protocols. In a 2020 systematic review that studied
the efficacy of antiresorptive drug holiday in preventing MRONJ, a variety of papers were identified with
differing conclusions suggesting that a high level of evidence for supporting or refuting the use of a holiday is
missing.199
The historical use of a drug holiday was intended to
decrease the prevalence of MRONJ subsequent to the
performance of high-risk surgical procedures. The
concern regarding this practice is the loss of efficacy
of antiresorptive therapy with the development of
SREs and fragility fractures. Among others, factors for
consideration may include disease-related risk (cancer
vs osteoporosis), drug-dosing frequency, duration of
therapy, comorbidities, other medications (especially
chemotherapy, steroids, or antiangiogenics), degree
of underlying infection/inflammation, and extent of
surgery to be performed.
Of note, the working group was unable to reach a
consensus regarding a recommendation on drug holidays and was evenly split between offering drug holidays to patients on a case-by-case basis using prior
recommendations and those who never recommend
drug holidays, believing that the risks of potential deleterious effects of suspending antiresorptive therapy
may outweigh a benefit.
A special concern should be considered for suspending RANKL inhibitors in osteoporosis patients. Several
studies have demonstrated a rebound increase in bone
resorption following the discontinuation of DMB, resulting in an increased risk of multilevel vertebral fractures.200-202 If DMB is to be suspended, the timing and
duration of the holiday should be optimized in order to
minimize this risk. The planned dentoalveolar surgery
can be completed 3-4 months following the last dose of

931

RUGGIERO ET AL

Table 2. MRONJ PREVENTION STRATEGIES

Pretherapy (Nonmalignant
Disease)
Pretherapy (malignant disease)

During antiresorptive therapy
(nonmalignant disease)

During antiresorptive therapy/
targeted therapies (malignant
disease)

 Educate patient about the potential risks associated with long-term ART.*
 Optimization of dental health can occur concurrent with ART.
 Educate patients about the higher risk of MRONJ and the importance of regimented dental care.
 Optimization of the dental health prior to the initiation of ART if systemic
conditions permit (extraction of nonrestorable teeth or teeth with a poor
prognosis).
 No alteration of operative plan for most patients.
 Considerations include drug schedule, duration of therapy, comorbidities,
other medications (especially chemotherapy, steroids, or antiangiogenics),
degree of underlying infection/inflammation, and extent of surgery to be
performed. Drug holidays are controversial.
 BTMy are not a useful tool to assess MRONJ risk.
 Educate patients about the higher MRONJ risk in the setting of malignant
disease.
 Educate the patient about the importance of regimented dental care and
prevention.
 Avoid dentoalveolar surgery if possible.
 Consider root retention techniques to avoid extractions.
 Dental implants are contraindicated.
 Drug holidays are controversial.

* Antiresorptive therapies.
y Bone turnover markers (CTX).
Ruggiero et al. AAOMS’ Position Paper on MRONJ—2022 Update. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022.

DMB when the level of osteoclast inhibition is waning.
It can then be reinstituted 6-8 weeks postsurgery. This
management strategy minimizes the length of the drug
holiday while maintaining a favorable environment for
bone healing.
Bone Turnover Markers. Since the 2014 AAOMS position paper, there has been a shift away from bone
turnover markers. No biomarkers are validated for clinical decision-making, and continued research and prospective studies are required before these markers can
be considered efficacious tools in estimating
MRONJ risk.
Other Biomarkers
Biomarkers related to angiogenesis, VEGF activity,
endocrine function, and PTH have more recently
been described.203-205 These markers remain at an
exploratory stage and are not yet validated for
clinical decision-making.
PREVENTION STRATEGIES

Patients scheduled to initiate antiresorptive treatment for cancer therapy
The treatment objective for this group of patients is
to minimize the risk of developing MRONJ (Table 2).
Although a small percentage of patients receiving
antiresorptives develop osteonecrosis of the jaw spontaneously, the majority of affected patients experience

this complication following dentoalveolar surgery.5,112,165,206,207 Therefore, if systemic conditions
permit, initiation of antiresorptive therapy should be
delayed until dental health is optimized.173,208 This decision must be made in conjunction with the treating
physician and dentist and other specialists involved
in the care of the patient. There is widespread
consensus that optimizing dental health prior to initiating therapy is efficacious and of paramount importance.38,185,186,209 Medical oncologists should
educate their patients about the importance of dental
health and the efficacy of prophylactic dental treatment in the prevention of MRONJ. Similar to patients
who are to receive radiation therapy, optimizing the
dental health in patients receiving antiresorptives or
other therapies that can compromise bone healing is
essential. The pretreatment evaluation of dental health
must extend beyond a review of systems and include a
physical and radiographic exam. Therefore, a comprehensive dental examination performed by a dental
health professional would be a prudent approach for
all patients prior to receiving antiresorptive therapy
for malignant disease. This level of dental health assessment is most appropriately performed by a dental
health professional.
The importance of minimizing the burden of dental
infection and inflammation prior to dentoalveolar surgery in this cohort of patients with an elevated MRONJ
risk cannot be over-emphasized. Nonrestorable teeth

932
and those with a poor prognosis should be extracted.
Other necessary elective dentoalveolar surgery also
should be completed at this time. It remains advisable
that antiresorptive therapy should be delayed, if systemic conditions permit, until the surgical site(s)
have mucosalized or until there is adequate osseous
healing. Dental prophylaxis, caries control, conservative restorative dentistry, and nonoperative endodontic therapy are critical to maintaining functionally
sound teeth. This level of care must be continued on
a frequent and indefinite basis.185
The posterior lingual plate region is a common site
for trauma and mucosal irritation in denture
wearers.5,75,170 Therefore, patients with full or partial
dentures should be examined for areas of mucosal
trauma, especially along the lingual flange region. It
also is critical that patients be educated as to the
importance of dental hygiene and regular dental evaluations, and specifically instructed to report any
pain, swelling, or exposed bone.
Patients scheduled to initiate antiresorptive treatment for osteoporosis
Patients who are scheduled to receive antiresorptive therapy for the prevention of fragility fractures
assume a significantly lower risk of MRONJ. Therefore, the urgency and the timing of optimizing the
dental health are not as crucial. However, at the initiation of treatment, it would be prudent to educate
patients regarding the potential risks of MRONJ.
The importance of optimizing dental health
throughout this treatment period and beyond cannot
be underestimated.
It is not uncommon for patients to seek the consultation of an oral and maxillofacial surgeon in guiding
their decision about starting or continuing antiresorptive therapy. In this scenario, the consulting oral and
maxillofacial surgeon should use this opportunity to
place the risks and benefits into the proper perspective. More specifically, patients should be reminded
of the benefits associated with antiresorptive therapies
in preventing fragility fractures and an acknowledgment of the rare occurrence of MRONJ.
The initial enthusiasm and attention associated
with the discovery of MRONJ have had unintended
consequences. When initially described, a ‘‘class effect’’ was observed, suggesting that MRONJ rates
for patients receiving oncologic doses of BPs and
those receiving osteoporotic doses of BPs were
similar. A plateau and a decline in the use of BPs
for osteoporosis was noted in 2006 and is hypothesized to be associated with various safety concerns,
such as MRONJ. Patients are becoming increasingly
more reluctant to begin or comply with their antiresorptive therapy. Current evidence also confirms an
increase in fragility fractures with significant associ-

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE

ated morbidity. As one salient example, hip fracture
rates in the United States declined each year from
2002 to 2012 and then plateaued at levels higher
than projected for 2013 to 2015, attributable to an
‘‘osteoporosis treatment gap.’’210 Hip fracture carries
significant morbidity, with only 40 percent to 60
percent of individuals recovering their prefracture
level of mobility and ability to perform instrumental
activities of daily living.211 These data are representative of a true health crisis. The documented risk
for developing MRONJ is low; however, the
patient-perceived risk is not. As such, patients are
unwilling to start or continue antiresorptive medical
therapy. Patients are irrationally denying themselves
the tangible therapeutic benefit of antiresorptive
therapy to minimize the risk of fragility fractures
in order to prevent a minuscule risk of developing MRONJ.
It is clear the benefit of fracture prevention outweighs the risk of MRONJ development in osteoporotic patients.212 This benefit is even more favorable
in the cancer population where bone-stabilizing medications significantly improve quality of life, and it is
detrimental when antiresorptives are withheld due
to MRONJ safety concerns.
Asymptomatic patients receiving antiresorptive
therapies for cancer
Maintaining good oral hygiene and dental care is of
paramount importance in preventing dental disease
that may require eventual extractions or other dentoalveolar surgery. Procedures that involve direct osseous
injury should be avoided if possible. If a dentoalveolar
surgical procedure is unavoidable (eg, fractured tooth,
advanced periodontal disease), patients should be
informed of the associated risks. The benefit of a
drug holiday remains unsubstantiated in this setting.
Nonrestorable teeth may be treated by removal of
the crowns and endodontic treatment of the remaining roots.213 Teeth may be extracted if necessary.
Placement of dental implants should be avoided in
the oncology patient receiving parenteral antiresorptive therapy or antiangiogenic medications. Case series
and systematic reviews have reported necrosis associated with antiresorptive therapy and implant placement.194,214-216
Asymptomatic patients receiving antiresorptive
therapy for osteoporosis
Since the 2014 position paper, epidemiologic data
regarding the risk of MRONJ in patients receiving
antiresorptive therapy for osteoporosis remain
limited due to the lack of sound prospective studies
with sufficient power. Nevertheless, the risk for
developing MRONJ is between 0.02 percent and
0.04 percent for BPs and 0.3 percent for DMB. (see

933

RUGGIERO ET AL

Table 1). Sound recommendations based on strong
clinical research design are still lacking for patients
taking oral BPs.
In general, elective dentoalveolar surgery does not
appear to be contraindicated in this group. Risk assessment for the development of MRONJ in these patients
includes the above-stated data and the discussion
above related to drug holidays.
The placement of dental implants in the context of
antiresorptive therapy for osteoporosis continues to
be an area of research interest. Several systematic reviews have acknowledged the lack of quality data and
randomized clinical trials. Some studies have recommended caution, especially with a longer duration of
therapy or steroid use.194,216 For example, in their systematic review, Granate et al,216 identified several
studies that reported an elevated MRONJ risk associated with implants placed in the posterior jaw if the
duration of bisphosphonate therapy exceeded 3 years
and if the patients were receiving systemic corticosteroids. In contrast to these studies, systematic reviews
by Gelazius et al, and Stavropoulos et al, reported no increase in risk.214,217 A recent retrospective propensitymatched cohort study of 44,900 patients reported a
decreased risk of ONJ in osteoporosis patients
receiving implants compared to matched controls
who did not have implants. Of note, 9,738 patients
had a history of BP use, and the results for implants
was in contrast to risk increase for patients who underwent tooth extraction.218
Reports of implant-related (MRONJ) necrosis can be
divided into the early (implant surgery-triggered) or
late (implant presence-triggered) category.215,219,220
In these reviews, the majority of the implant-related
necrosis were not related to the initial implant surgery
but occurred late (>12 months) and often at sites
where implants were placed prior to the initiation of
bisphosphonate therapy. The common presentation
was an en bloc failure, where the osseointegration of
the implants is maintained within the sequestrum.220,221 This has been recognized as a separate
pattern of failure that is distinct from the common
peri-implantitis failure and considered by some to be
pathognomonic of MRONJ. Although there are no prospective studies or systematic reviews pertaining to
implant-related necrosis associated with RANKL
inhibitors or other targeted therapies, AAOMS considers this to have a similar level of risk.
In summary, robust data do not exist, and available
data are conflicting. Therefore, AAOMS suggests that
if dental implants are placed, informed consent should
be provided to include the low risk of MRONJ, as well
as early and late implant failure. These patients should
be placed on a regular long-term recall schedule.

Treatment Strategies
AAOMS has developed a series of treatment algorithms to streamline the evaluation (Fig 1) and management strategies (Figs 2-4) for patients with MRONJ.
These strategies are based on a current review of
nonoperative and operative therapies and their
associated outcomes. Emphasis is placed on both
nonoperative and operative management being
acceptable for all stages of disease based on surgical
judgment and patient factors in a shared decisionmaking model.
Nonoperative therapy
The efficacy of nonoperative therapies in the management of MRONJ is documented in the literature
and provides a useful adjunct to the spectrum of management strategies that also include operative treatment (Fig 2). Nonoperative strategies can be useful
in all stages, especially where significant comorbidities
preclude operative treatment. They may also result in
stabilization of disease or cure in earlier stages. The
goal of both operative and nonoperative therapies remains the same: curative therapy and quality-of-life
improvement. Nonoperative therapy heavily focuses
on patient education, reassurance, control of pain,
and control of secondary infection to allow for sequestration of the exposed, necrotic bone.3,63
Decisions on operative versus nonoperative therapy
should be patient-specific and tailored to individual
needs. The risk versus benefit ratio (including quality
of life with their current symptomology), ability to
perform good wound care to prevent infection and disease spread, morbidity from a major surgical procedure, as well as oral function or dental rehabilitation
after marginal or segmental resection should be
considered. Radiographic imaging is of utmost importance in the evaluation of MRONJ lesions. Threedimensional imaging can identify forming or fully
formed sequestra and potentially decrease the invasiveness of a surgical procedure. Maintenance of
maxillary or mandibular integrity is desirable, as the
reconstruction of surgical defects in this population
can be challenging.63,222
Stage 1 patients can be managed with chlorhexidine
wound care and improved oral hygiene to remove the
biofilm from the necrotic bone surface.63 Surgery may
not be indicated in the absence of disease progression,
with patient adequate quality of life.63,223 Stage 2 patients may struggle with local wound care and may
require antibiotics for symptom control. Those patients who remain refractory to nonoperative treatment or those patients who cannot maintain
adequate hygiene may benefit from operative therapy.
In the presence of developing or established bony

934

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE

FIGURE 1. Initial evaluation.
Ruggiero et al. AAOMS’ Position Paper on MRONJ—2022 Update. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022.

sequestra, nonoperative therapy may be indicated to
allow for ultimate sequestrectomy. Exfoliation of the
exposed, necrotic bone will often result in disease resolution.63,224,225 Therefore, for those patients with

Stage 2 or 3 diseases who are poor surgical candidates,
nonoperative therapies may be indicated (Fig 2).
There is little evidence to suggest that the use of
adjunctive therapies, such as hyperbaric oxygen or

FIGURE 2. Non-operative therapies.
Ruggiero et al. AAOMS’ Position Paper on MRONJ—2022 Update. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022.

935

RUGGIERO ET AL

FIGURE 3. Operative therapies for mandibular disease.
Ruggiero et al. AAOMS’ Position Paper on MRONJ—2022 Update. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022.

ozone therapy, can lead to MRONJ resolution. Larger
studies and controlled trials have yet to demonstrate
the efficacy of the aforementioned treatments.226-229
Therefore, these therapies should not be
recommended as a mainstay of treatment at this time.
The use of vitamin E and pentoxifylline as an adjunct
to standard MRONJ therapies have been reported only
in case studies. A randomized, prospective, placebocontrolled trial of vitamin E and pentoxifylline is underway and will provide additional information about

this treatment modality. Teriparatide, one of the few
anabolic agents used for the treatment of osteoporosis,
also has shown promise as an adjunct for the treatment
of MRONJ in osteoporotic patients.230
Operative therapy
While nonoperative therapy continues to be a treatment option for MRONJ, operative therapy is increasingly reported as a viable option with high success
rates for all stages of the disease (Figs 3 and 4).

FIGURE 4. Operative therapies for maxillary disease.
Ruggiero et al. AAOMS’ Position Paper on MRONJ—2022 Update. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022.

936
Numerous reports have identified high success rates
associated with resection of MRONJ lesions.231-237
Importantly, one must consider that MRONJ may
progress over time, albeit in an unpredictable
manner.238 Furthermore, adopting a nonoperative
approach to MRONJ does not uniformly result in
sequestration of the exposed necrotic bone with disease resolution.239 Thus, operative intervention
should be explored and presented as a treatment option in an attempt to reduce the progression of disease
with the recognition that early surgical intervention
can predict beneficial patient outcomes.240
Segmental or marginal resection of the mandible
and partial maxillectomy are effective methods to
control MRONJ.231-238,241 This approach can be
applied to patients with all stages of MRONJ,
including Stage 1 disease.169 These resections
require margins beyond the borders of the
necrotic bone to an area of vital, bleeding bone.
Additional reports have identified success when
surgical resection of MRONJ was performed by
experienced surgeons.242,243 Consistent with surgical principles, control of comorbid conditions is
paramount in managing MRONJ.241 Physiologically
compromised patients, such as those with an
increasing burden of distant metastatic disease,
may not respond favorably to resection of their
osteonecrotic jaw, and may occasionally develop
refractory disease.241 Finally, surgical resection for
MRONJ in patients with metastatic cancer may
identify metastases in the jaw specimen, albeit
in a minority of patients.62
Active clinical and radiographic surveillance is critical in the nonoperative management of patients
with Stage 1, 2, and 3 diseases to monitor for signs of
disease progression. In patients who demonstrate
the failure of nonoperative therapy, early operative
intervention is recommended. In patients with a progressive clinical or radiographic disease or more
advanced disease at presentation, surgical resection
of MRONJ should be performed without first instituting prolonged nonoperative measures. MRONJ represents a complex wound whereby operative therapy
can be performed in a timely fashion.241,244 Although
controversy between operative and nonoperative
therapies exist, operative treatment of patients has
demonstrated maintenance of mucosal coverage,
improved quality of life, and expedient resumption
of antiresorptive therapy for all stages of MRONJ disease.245 The benefit of drug holidays for the operative
intervention of MRONJ has not been substantiated.

Future Research
AAOMS realizes that MRONJ is a complex disease
process with a multifactorial etiology for which

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE

many questions remain unanswered. Continued preclinical and clinical data are required, especially in
the form of prospective studies. Continued research
efforts and the outcomes that result should be
considered the foundation upon which recommendations are developed that will guide patients and
providers. While the data supporting the conclusion
that antiresorptives represent genuine risk factors
are robust, this is not the case for other classifications of medications (eg, antiangiogenics, corticosteroids, immune modulators). Published studies have
reported a relationship of certain dosing practices
(eg, transition from BPs to DMB) or a synergistic effect between antiresorptive medications and antiangiogenic medication with a risk of MRONJ. These
associations, however, are based on case reports
and small case series. It also has been hypothesized
that the total exposure to an antiresorptive medication is a risk factor for developing MRONJ. However, this has been difficult to demonstrate, possibly
as a result of not having a good measure of exposure other than years of treatment. Similar to the
cancer risk associated with tobacco use (eg, pack/
years), the antiresorptive exposure risk MRONJ
may be better defined as a cumulative dose load
(eg, mg equivalent of BP/years of exposure) that
would account for risk associated with different
medications and dosing schedules over time. Dosereduction protocols and individualized strategies
for antiresorptive therapy in long-term cancer survivors with a metastatic bone disease are being
explored. It remains to be determined if these protocols will reduce the risk of MRONJ in this patient
cohort.246 AAOMS acknowledges the challenge of
elucidating potential risks associated with non-antiresorptive therapies, alone or in combination with
antiresorptive medications, and therefore considers
it imperative that research efforts continue in the
form of prospective studies.
A review of the current literature also failed to provide sound data in the form of randomized, controlled
trials that would establish the effectiveness of biomarkers and drug holidays or validate a risk relationship with genetic markers and MRONJ. Until these
relationships are established or refuted, AAOMS considers it prudent to recognize that these factors may
play a role in the development and management
of MRONJ.

References
1. American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons position paper on bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the
jaws. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 65:369, 2007
2. Ruggiero SL, Dodson TB, Assael LA, et al: American Association
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons position paper on

RUGGIERO ET AL
bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw - 2009 update.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg 67(Supp 1), 2009
3. Ruggiero SL, Dodson TB, Fantasia J, et al: American Association
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons position paper on medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw–2014 update. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 72:1938, 2014
4. Saad F, Gleason DM, Murray R, et al: Zoledronic acid
prostate cancer study G. A randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of zoledronic acid in patients with hormone-refractory metastatic prostate carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst
94:1458, 2002
5. Saad F, Brown JE, Van Poznak C, et al: Incidence, risk factors, and outcomes of osteonecrosis of the jaw: Integrated
analysis from three blinded active-controlled phase III trials
in cancer patients with bone metastases. Ann Oncol 23:
1341, 2012
6. Rosen LS, Gordon D, Tchekmedyian S, et al: Zoledronic acid
versus placebo in the treatment of skeletal metastases in patients with lung cancer and other solid tumors: A phase III,
double-blind, randomized trial–the zoledronic acid lung cancer and other solid tumors study group. J Clin Oncol 21:
3150, 2003
7. Hortobagyi GN, Theriault RL, Porter L, et al: Efficacy of pamidronate in reducing skeletal complications in patients
with breast cancer and lytic bone metastases. Protocol 19
Aredia Breast Cancer Study Group. N Engl J Med 335:
1785, 1996
8. Hortobagyi GN, Theriault RL, Lipton A, et al: Long-term prevention of skeletal complications of metastatic breast cancer with
pamidronate. Protocol 19 Aredia Breast Cancer Study Group. J
Clin Oncol 16:2038, 1998
9. Berenson JR, Lichtenstein A, Porter L, et al: Efficacy of pamidronate in reducing skeletal events in patients with advanced
multiple myeloma. Myeloma Aredia Study Group N Engl J
Med 334:488, 1996
10. Berenson JR, Lichtenstein A, Porter L, et al: Long-term pamidronate treatment of advanced multiple myeloma patients reduces skeletal events. Myeloma Aredia Study Group. J Clin
Oncol 16:593, 1998
11. Berenson JR, Hillner BE, Kyle RA, et al: American Society of
Clinical Oncology Bisphosphonates Expert Panel. American
Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guidelines: The
role of bisphosphonates in multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol
20:3719, 2002
12. Stopeck A, Brufsky A, Kennedy L, et al: Cost-effectiveness of denosumab for the prevention of skeletal-related events in patients with solid tumors and bone metastases in the United
States. J Med Econ 23:37, 2020
13. Jeon HL, Oh IS, Baek YH, et al: Zoledronic acid and skeletalrelated events in patients with bone metastatic cancer or multiple myeloma. J Bone Miner Metab 38:254, 2020
14. Delmas PD: The use of bisphosphonates in the treatment of
osteoporosis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 17:462, 2005
15. Watts NB: Bisphosphonate treatment of osteoporosis. Clin Geriatr Med 19:395, 2003
16. Gossiel F, Paggiosi MA, Naylor KE, et al: The effect of bisphosphonates on bone turnover and bone balance in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis: The T-score bone
marker approach in the TRIO study. Bone 131:115158,
2020
17. Black DM, Cummings SR, Karpf DB, et al: Randomized trial of
effect of alendronate on risk of fracture in women with existing
vertebral fractures. Fracture Intervention Trial Research
Group. Lancet 348:1535, 1996
18. Black DM, Delmas PD, Eastell R, et al: Once-yearly zoledronic
acid for treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. N Engl J
Med 356:1809, 2007
19. Nakamura T, Fukunaga M, Nakano T, et al: Efficacy and safety of
once-yearly zoledronic acid in Japanese patients with primary
osteoporosis: Two-year results from a randomized placebocontrolled double-blind study (ZOledroNate treatment in efficacy to osteoporosis; ZONE study). Osteoporos Int 28:389,
2017

937
20. Cranney A, Wells G, Willan A, et al: Meta-analyses of therapies
for postmenopausal osteoporosis. II. Meta-analysis of alendronate for the treatment of postmenopausal women. Endocr
Rev 23:508, 2002
21. Delmas PD, Meunier PJ: The management of Paget’s disease of
bone. N Engl J Med 336:558, 1997
22. Letocha AD, Cintas HL, Troendle JF, et al: Controlled trial of pamidronate in children with types III and IV osteogenesis imperfecta confirms vertebral gains but not short-term functional
improvement. J Bone Miner Res 20:977, 2005
23. Florenzano P, Pan KS, Brown SM, et al: Age-related changes and
effects of bisphosphonates on bone turnover and disease progression in fibrous dysplasia of bone. J Bone Miner Res 34:653,
2019
24. Boyce AM, Kelly MH, Brillante BA, et al: A randomized, double
blind, placebo-controlled trial of alendronate treatment for
fibrous dysplasia of bone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:4133,
2014
25. Cummings SR, San Martin J, McClung MR, et al: Denosumab for
prevention of fractures in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 361:756, 2009
26. Papapoulos S, Chapurlat R, Libanati C, et al: Five years of denosumab exposure in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis: Results from the first two years of the FREEDOM
extension. J Bone Miner Res 27:694, 2012
27. Kanis JA, Harvey NC, Lorentzon M, et al: Combining fracture
outcomes in phase 3 trials of osteoporosis: An analysis of the
effects of denosumab in postmenopausal women. Osteoporos
Int 32:165, 2021
28. Miller PD, Pannacciulli N, Malouf-Sierra J, et al: Efficacy and
safety of denosumab vs. bisphosphonates in postmenopausal
women previously treated with oral bisphosphonates. Osteoporos Int 31:181, 2020
29. Terpos E, Raje N, Croucher P, et al: Denosumab compared
with zoledronic acid on PFS in multiple myeloma: Exploratory results of an international phase 3 study. Blood Adv
5:725, 2021
30. Fizazi K, Carducci M, Smith M, et al: Denosumab versus zoledronic acid for treatment of bone metastases in men with
castration-resistant prostate cancer: A randomized, doubleblind study. Lancet 377:813, 2011
31. Stopeck AT, Lipton A, Body JJ, et al: Denosumab compared with
zoledronic acid for the treatment of bone metastases in patients with advanced breast cancer: A randomized, doubleblind study. J Clin Oncol 28:5132, 2010
32. Chawla S, Henshaw R, Seeger L, et al: Safety and efficacy of denosumab for adults and skeletally mature adolescents with giant cell tumour of bone: Interim analysis of an open-label,
parallel-group, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 14:901, 2013
33. Bredell M, Rordorf T, Kroiss S, et al: Denosumab as a treatment alternative for central giant cell granuloma: A longterm retrospective cohort study. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 76:
775, 2018
34. Boyce AM: Denosumab: An emerging therapy in pediatric bone
Disorders. Curr Osteoporos Rep 15:283, 2017
35. de Castro LF, Burke AB, Wang HD, et al: Activation of RANK/
RANKL/OPG pathway is involved in the pathophysiology of
fibrous dysplasia and associated with disease burden. J Bone
Miner Res 34:290, 2019
36. Palmisano B, Spica E, Remoli C, et al: RANKL inhibition in
fibrous dysplasia of bone: A preclinical study in a mouse model
of the human disease. J Bone Miner Res 34:2171, 2019
37. Saag KG, Petersen J, Brandi ML, et al: Romosozumab or alendronate for fracture prevention in women with osteoporosis. N
Engl J Med 377:1417, 2017
38. Campisi G, Mauceri R, Bertoldo F, et al: Medication-related osteonecrosis of jaws (MRONJ) prevention and diagnosis: Italian
consensus update 2020. Int J Environ Res Public Health 17,
2020
39. Steinberg ME, Hayken GD, Steinberg DR: A quantitative system
for staging avascular necrosis. J Bone Joint Surg Br 77:34, 1995
40. Fleisher KE, Welch G, Kottal S, et al: Predicting risk for bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws: CTX versus

938
radiographic markers. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 110:509, 2010
41. Fedele S, Porter SR, D’Aiuto F, et al: Nonexposed variant of bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaw: A case series. Am J Med 123:1060, 2010
42. Fleisher KE, Janal MN, Albstein N, et al: Comorbid conditions
are a risk for osteonecrosis of the jaw unrelated to antiresorptive therapy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol 127:
140, 2019
43. Farah CS, Savage NW: Oral ulceration with bone sequestration.
Aust Dent J 48:61, 2003
44. Filippi A, Dreyer T, Bohle RM, et al: Sequestration of the alveolar bone by invasive aspergillosis in acute myeloid leukemia.
J Oral Pathol Med 26:437, 1997
45. Friel P, Macintyre DR: Bone sequestration from lower 3rd molar
region. Br Dent J 193:366, 2002
46. Huang JS, Kok SH, Lee JJ, et al: Extensive maxillary sequestration resulting from mucormycosis. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg
43:532, 2005
47. Peters E, Daley T: American Academy of Oral and Maxillofacial
Pathology. Persistent painful ulcer of the posterior lingual
mandibular mucosa. J Contemp Dent Pract 4:71, 2003
48. Sonnier KE, Horning GM: Spontaneous bony exposure: A
report of 4 cases of idiopathic exposure and sequestration of
alveolar bone. J Periodontol 68:758, 1997
49. Peters E, Lovas GL, Wysocki GP: Lingual mandibular sequestration and ulceration. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 75:739,
1993
50. Nandakumar H, Shankaramba KB: Massive sequestration of the
upper jaw: A case report. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 28:55, 1990
51. Ramon Y, Oberman M, Horowitz I, Freedman: Extensive maxillary sequestration resulting from rhinocerebral mucormyocosis. J Oral Surg 35:989, 1977
52. Liao MT, Chien WC, Wang JC, et al: Increased risk of bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with Sjogren’s syndrome: Nationwide population-based cohort study.
BMJ Open 9:e024655, 2019
53. Schwartz HC: Osteonecrosis of the jaws. A complication of cancer chemotherapy. Head Neck Surg 4:251, 1982
54. Cooper JC: Tooth exfoliation and osteonecrosis of the jaw
following herpes zoster. Br Dent J 143:297, 1977
55. Schwartz O, Kvorning SA: Tooth exfoliation, osteonecrosis of
the jaw and neuralgia following herpes zoster of the trigeminal
nerve. Int J Oral Surg 11:364, 1982
56. Calhoun KH, Shapiro RD, Stiernberg CM, et al: Osteomyelitis of
the mandible. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 114:1157,
1988
57. Koorbusch GF, Fotos P, Goll KT: Retrospective assessment of
osteomyelitis. Etiology, demographics, risk factors, and management in 35 cases. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 74:149,
1992
58. Maines E, Monti E, Doro F, et al: Children and adolescents
treated with neridronate for osteogenesis imperfecta show
no evidence of any osteonecrosis of the jaw. J Bone Miner
Metab 30:434, 2012
59. Black DM, Schwartz AV, Ensrud KE, et al: Effects of continuing
or stopping alendronate after 5 years of treatment: The fracture
intervention trial long-term extension (FLEX): A randomized
trial. JAMA 296:2927, 2006
60. Black DM, Reid IR, Boonen S, et al: The effect of 3 versus 6 years
of zoledronic acid treatment of osteoporosis: A randomized
extension to the HORIZON-Pivotal fracture trial (PFT). J Bone
Miner Res 27:243, 2012
61. Black DM, Reid IR, Cauley JA, et al: The effect of 6 versus 9
years of zoledronic acid treatment in osteoporosis: A randomized second extension to the HORIZON-Pivotal fracture trial
(PFT). J Bone Miner Res 30:934, 2015
62. Carlson ER, Fleisher KE, Ruggiero SL: Metastatic cancer identified in osteonecrosis specimens of the jaws in patients
receiving intravenous bisphosphonate medications. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg 71:2077, 2013
63. Hadaya D, Soundia A, Freymiller E, et al: Nonsurgical
management of medication-related osteonecrosis of the

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE
jaws using local wound care. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 76:
2332, 2018
64. Marx RE, Sawatari Y, Fortin M, Broumand V: Bisphosphonateinduced exposed bone (osteonecrosis/osteopetrosis) of the
jaws: Risk factors, recognition, prevention, and treatment. J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 63:1567, 2005
65. Aghaloo T, Hazboun R, Tetradis S: Pathophysiology of osteonecrosis of the jaws. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am 27:489,
2015
66. Johnston CB, Dagar M: Osteoporosis in older adults. Med Clin
North Am 104:873, 2020
67. Black DM, Rosen CJ: Clinical practice. Postmenopausal Osteoporos N Engl J Med 374:254, 2016
68. Schwartz E, Reichert Z, Van Poznak C: Pharmacologic management of metastatic bone disease. Bone 115735, 2020
69. Coleman R: Bisphosphonates and breast cancer from cautious
palliation to saving lives. Bone 140:115570, 2020
70. Lacey DL, Boyle WJ, Simonet WS, et al: Bench to bedside:
Elucidation of the OPG-RANK-RANKL pathway and the
development of denosumab. Nat Rev Drug Discov 11:401,
2012
71. Coleman RE, Major P, Lipton A, et al: Predictive value of bone
resorption and formation markers in cancer patients with
bone metastases receiving the bisphosphonate zoledronic
acid. J Clin Oncol 23:4925, 2005
72. Stewart AF: Clinical practice. Hypercalcemia associated with
cancer. N Engl J Med 352:373, 2005
73. Benjamin B, Benjamin MA, Swe M, Sugathan S: Review on the
comparison of effectiveness between denosumab and bisphosphonates in post-menopausal osteoporosis. Osteoporos
Sarcopenia 2:77, 2016
74. Limones A, Saez-Alcaide LM, Diaz-Parreno SA, et al: Medicationrelated osteonecrosis of the jaws (MRONJ) in cancer patients
treated with denosumab vs.. zoledronic acid: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal 25:
e326, 2020
75. Hallmer F, Andersson G, Gotrick B, et al: Prevalence, initiating
factor, and treatment outcome of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw-a 4-year prospective study. Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol 126:477, 2018
76. Soundia A, Hadaya D, Esfandi N, et al: Osteonecrosis of the jaws
(ONJ) in mice after extraction of teeth with periradicular disease. Bone 90:133, 2016
77. Wehrhan F, Gross C, Creutzburg K, et al: Osteoclastic expression of higher-level regulators NFATc1 and BCL6 in medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw secondary to
bisphosphonate therapy: A comparison with osteoradionecrosis and osteomyelitis. J Transl Med 17:69, 2019
78. de Molon RS, Shimamoto H, Bezouglaia O, et al: OPG-Fc but not
zoledronic acid discontinuation reverses osteonecrosis of the
jaws (ONJ) in mice. J Bone Miner Res 30:1627, 2015
79. Hadaya D, Soundia A, Gkouveris I, et al: Antiresorptive-type and
discontinuation-timing Affect ONJ burden. J Dent Res 100:746,
2021
80. Kuroshima S, Entezami P, McCauley LK, Yamashita J: Early effects of parathyroid hormone on bisphosphonate/steroid-associated compromised osseous wound healing. Osteoporos Int
25:1141, 2014
81. Dayisoylu EH, Senel FC, Ungor C, et al: The effects of adjunctive
parathyroid hormone injection on bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws: An animal study. Int J Oral Maxillofac
Surg 42:1475, 2013
82. Chopra K, Malhan N: Teriparatide for the treatment of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw. Am J Ther 28:e469, 2021
83. Ficarra G, Beninati F, Rubino I, et al: Osteonecrosis of the jaws
in periodontal patients with a history of bisphosphonates treatment. J Clin Periodontol 32:1123, 2005
84. Thumbigere-Math V, Michalowicz BS, Hodges JS, et al: Periodontal disease as a risk factor for bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw. J Periodontol 85:226, 2014
85. Aghaloo TL, Kang B, Sung EC, et al: Periodontal disease and bisphosphonates induce osteonecrosis of the jaws in the rat. J
Bone Miner Res 26:1871, 2011

RUGGIERO ET AL
86. Kang B, Cheong S, Chaichanasakul T, et al: Periapical disease
and bisphosphonates induce osteonecrosis of the jaws in
mice. J Bone Miner Res 28:1631, 2013
87. Hadaya D, Soundia A, Gkouveris I, et al: Development of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw after extraction of teeth
with experimental periapical disease. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 77:
71, 2019
88. Aguirre JI, Akhter MP, Kimmel DB, et al: Oncologic doses of zoledronic acid induce osteonecrosis of the jaw-like lesions in
rice rats (Oryzomys palustris) with periodontitis. J Bone Miner
Res 27:2130, 2012
89. Soma T, Iwasaki R, Sato Y, et al: Tooth extraction in mice administered zoledronate increases inflammatory cytokine levels and
promotes osteonecrosis of the jaw. J Bone Miner Metab 39:372,
2021
90. de Molon RS, Hsu C, Bezouglaia O, et al: Rheumatoid arthritis
Exacerbates the severity of osteonecrosis of the jaws (ONJ)
in mice. A randomized, prospective, controlled animal study.
J Bone Miner Res 31:1596, 2016
91. Kim T, Kim S, Song M, et al: Removal of pre-existing periodontal inflammatory condition before tooth extraction Ameliorates medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw-like
lesion in mice. Am J Pathol 188:2318, 2018
92. Kuroshima S, Nakajima K, Sasaki M, et al: Systemic administration of quality and quantity-controlled PBMNCs reduces bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of jaw-like lesions in
mice. Stem Cell Res Ther 10:209, 2019
93. Hansen T, Kunkel M, Weber A, James Kirkpatrick C: Osteonecrosis of the jaws in patients treated with bisphosphonates histomorphologic analysis in comparison with infected
osteoradionecrosis. J Oral Pathol Med 35:155, 2006
94. Mawardi H, Giro G, Kajiya M, et al: A role of oral bacteria in bisphosphonate-induced osteonecrosis of the jaw. J Dent Res 90:
1339, 2011
95. Vandone AM, Donadio M, Mozzati M, et al: Impact of dental
care in the prevention of bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaw: A single-center clinical experience. Ann Oncol
23:193, 2012
96. Sedghizadeh PP, Kumar SK, Gorur A, et al: Microbial biofilms in
osteomyelitis of the jaw and osteonecrosis of the jaw secondary
to bisphosphonate therapy. J Am Dent Assoc 140:1259, 2009
97. Francini F, Pascucci A, Francini E, et al: Osteonecrosis of the jaw
in patients with cancer who received zoledronic acid and bevacizumab. J Am Dent Assoc 142:506, 2011
98. Migliorati CA, Schubert MM, Peterson DE, Seneda LM: Bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of mandibular and
maxillary bone: An emerging oral complication of supportive
cancer therapy. Cancer 104:83, 2005
99. Petek D, Hannouche D, Suva D: Osteonecrosis of the femoral
head: Pathophysiology and current concepts of treatment.
EFORT Open Rev 4:85, 2019
100. Wood J, Bonjean K, Ruetz S, et al: Novel antiangiogenic effects
of the bisphosphonate compound zoledronic acid. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 302:1055, 2002
101. Santini D, Vincenzi B, Dicuonzo G, et al: Zoledronic acid induces significant and long-lasting modifications of circulating
angiogenic factors in cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res 9:
2893, 2003
102. Ishtiaq S, Edwards S, Sankaralingam A, et al: The effect of nitrogen containing bisphosphonates, zoledronate and alendronate,
on the production of pro-angiogenic factors by osteoblastic
cells. Cytokine 71:154, 2015
103. Kun-Darbois JD, Libouban H, Mabilleau G, et al: Bone mineralization and vascularization in bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw: An experimental study in the rat. Clin
Oral Investig 22:2997, 2018
104. Gao SY, Lin RB, Huang SH, et al: PDGF-BB exhibited therapeutic
effects on rat model of bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis
of the jaw by enhancing angiogenesis and osteogenesis. Bone
144:115117, 2021
105. Bi Y, Gao Y, Ehirchiou D, et al: Bisphosphonates cause osteonecrosis of the jaw-like disease in mice. Am J Pathol 177:280,
2010

939
106. Gkouveris I, Hadaya D, Soundia A, et al: Vasculature submucosal changes at early stages of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ).
Bone 123:234, 2019
107. Vallina C, Ramirez L, Torres J, et al: Osteonecrosis of the jaws
produced by sunitinib: A systematic review. Med Oral Patol
Oral Cir Bucal 24:e326, 2019
108. Gacche RN, Meshram RJ: Angiogenic factors as potential drug
target: Efficacy and limitations of anti-angiogenic therapy. Biochim Biophys Acta 1846(1):161, 2014
109. Akita Y, Kuroshima S, Nakajima K, et al: Effect of anti-angiogenesis induced by chemotherapeutic monotherapy, chemotherapeutic/bisphosphonate combination therapy and anti-VEGFA
mAb therapy on tooth extraction socket healing in mice. J
Bone Miner Metab 36:547, 2018
110. Rugani P, Walter C, Kirnbauer B, et al: Prevalence of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with breast
cancer, prostate cancer, and multiple myeloma. Dent J (Basel)
4:32, 2016
111. Dimopoulos MA, Kastritis E, Anagnostopoulos A, et al: Osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with multiple myeloma treated
with bisphosphonates: Evidence of increased risk after treatment with zoledronic acid. Haematologica 91:968, 2006
112. Badros A, Weikel D, Salama A, et al: Osteonecrosis of the jaw in
multiple myeloma patients: Clinical features and risk factors. J
Clin Oncol 24:945, 2006
113. Raje N, Terpos E, Willenbacher W, et al: Denosumab versus zoledronic acid in bone disease treatment of newly diagnosed
multiple myeloma: An international, double-blind, doubledummy, randomised, controlled, phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol
19:370, 2018
114. Filleul O, Crompot E, Saussez S: Bisphosphonate-induced osteonecrosis of the jaw: A review of 2,400 patient cases. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 136:1117, 2010
115. Bastos P, Patel V, Festy F, et al: In-vivo imaging of the microvasculature of the soft tissue margins of osteonecrotic jaw lesions.
Br Dent J 223:699, 2017
116. Zhang Q, Yu W, Lee S, et al: Bisphosphonate induces osteonecrosis of the jaw in diabetic mice via NLRP3/Caspase-1Dependent IL-1 beta mechanism. J Bone Miner Res 30:2300, 2015
117. Kabilova TO, Kovtonyuk LV, Zonov EV, et al: Immunotherapy of
hepatocellular carcinoma with small double-stranded RNA.
BMC Cancer 14:338, 2014
118. Hayano H, Kuroshima S, Sasaki M, et al: Distinct immunopathology in the early stages between different antiresorptivesrelated osteonecrosis of the jaw-like lesions in mice. Bone
135:115308, 2020
119. Rao NJ, Yu RQ, Wang JY, et al: Effect of periapical diseases in
development of MRONJ in immunocompromised mouse
model. Biomed Res Int 2019:1271492, 2019
120. Aghaloo TL, Tetradis S: Osteonecrosis of the jaw in the absence
of antiresorptive or antiangiogenic exposure: A series of 6
cases. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 75:129, 2017
121. Bamias A, Kastritis E, Bamia C, et al: Osteonecrosis of the jaw in
cancer after treatment with bisphosphonates: Incidence and
risk factors. J Clin Oncol 23:8580, 2005
122. Qu X, Wang Z, Zhou T, Shan L: Determination of the molecular
mechanism by which macrophages and gammadelta-T cells
contribute to ZOL-induced ONJ. Aging (Albany NY) 12:
20743, 2020
123. Rodriguez-Lozano FJ, Onate-Sanchez R, Gonzalvez-Garcia M,
et al: Allogeneic bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in tooth extractions sites Ameliorates the incidence
of osteonecrotic jaw-like lesions in zoledronic acid-treated rats.
J Clin Med 9:1649, 2020
124. Alonso-Rodriguez E, Gonzalez-Martin-Moro J, CebrianCarretero JL, et al: Bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis.
Application of adipose-derived stem cells in an experimental
murine model. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal 24:e529, 2019
125. Barba-Recreo P, Del Castillo Pardo de Vera JL, GeorgievHristov T, et al: Adipose-derived stem cells and platelet-rich
plasma for preventive treatment of bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in a murine model. J Craniomaxillofac
Surg 43:1161, 2015

940
126. Sarasquete ME, Garcia-Sanz R, Marin L, et al: Bisphosphonaterelated osteonecrosis of the jaw is associated with polymorphisms of the cytochrome P450 CYP2C8 in multiple myeloma:
A genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism analysis.
Blood 112:2709, 2008
127. Yang G, Hamadeh IS, Katz J, et al: SIRT1/HERC4 Locus associated with bisphosphonate-induced osteonecrosis of the jaw:
An Exome-wide association analysis. J Bone Miner Res 33:91,
2018
128. Yang G, Collins JM, Rafiee R, et al: SIRT1 gene SNP rs932658 is
associated with medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw. J
Bone Miner Res 36:347, 2021
129. Lee KH, Kim SH, Kim CH, et al: Identifying genetic variants underlying medication-induced osteonecrosis of the jaw in cancer and osteoporosis: A case control study. J Transl Med 17:
381, 2019
130. Kastritis E, Melea P, Bagratuni T, et al: Genetic factors related
with early onset of osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with
multiple myeloma under zoledronic acid therapy. Leuk Lymphoma 58:2304, 2017
131. Guo Z, Cui W, Que L, et al: Pharmacogenetics of medicationrelated osteonecrosis of the jaw: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 49:298, 2020
132. Valachis A, Polyzos NP, Coleman RE, et al: Adjuvant therapy
with zoledronic acid in patients with breast cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Oncologist 18:353, 2013
133. Coleman R, Cameron D, Dodwell D, et al: Adjuvant zoledronic
acid in patients with early breast cancer: Final efficacy analysis
of the AZURE (BIG 01/04) randomised open-label phase 3 trial.
Lancet Oncol 15:997, 2014
134. Gnant M, Pfeiler G, Dubsky PC, et al: Adjuvant denosumab in
breast cancer (ABCSG-18): A multicentre, randomised, double
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 386:433, 2015
135. Boquete-Castro A, Gomez-Moreno G, Calvo-Guirado JL, et al:
Denosumab and osteonecrosis of the jaw. A systematic analysis
of events reported in clinical trials. Clin Oral Implants Res 27:
367, 2016
136. Macherey S, Monsef I, Jahn F, et al: Bisphosphonates for
advanced prostate cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:
CD006250, 2017
137. O’Carrigan B, Wong MH, Willson ML, et al: Bisphosphonates
and other bone agents for breast cancer. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 10:CD003474, 2017
138. Coleman R, Finkelstein DM, Barrios C, et al: Adjuvant denosumab in early breast cancer (D-CARE): An international, multicentre, randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol
21:60, 2020
139. Barrett-Lee P, Casbard A, Abraham J, et al: Oral ibandronic acid
versus intravenous zoledronic acid in treatment of bone metastases from breast cancer: A randomised, open label, noninferiority phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 15:114, 2014
140. Himelstein AL, Foster JC, Khatcheressian JL, et al: Effect of
longer-Interval vs standard dosing of zoledronic acid on skeletal events in patients with bone metastases: A randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 317:48, 2017
141. Henry D, Vadhan-Raj S, Hirsh V, et al: Delaying skeletal-related
events in a randomized phase 3 study of denosumab versus zoledronic acid in patients with advanced cancer: An analysis of
data from patients with solid tumors. Support Care Cancer 22:
679, 2014
142. Peddi P, Lopez-Olivo MA, Pratt GF, Suarez-Almazor ME: Denosumab in patients with cancer and skeletal metastases: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Cancer Treat Rev 39:97, 2013
143. Jackson GH, Morgan GJ, Davies FE, et al: Osteonecrosis of the
jaw and renal safety in patients with newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma: Medical Research Council Myeloma IX Study results.
Br J Haematol 166:109, 2014
144. Wang X, Yang KH, Wanyan P, Tian JH: Comparison of the efficacy and safety of denosumab versus bisphosphonates in
breast cancer and bone metastases treatment: A meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Oncol Lett 7:1997, 2014
145. Ng TL, Tu MM, Ibrahim MFK, et al: Long-term impact of bonemodifying agents for the treatment of bone metastases: A systematic review. Support Care Cancer 29:925, 2021

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE
146. Fusco V, Santini D, Armento G, et al: Osteonecrosis of jaw
beyond antiresorptive (bone-targeted) agents: New horizons
in oncology. Expert Opin Drug Saf 15:925, 2016
147. Nicolatou-Galitis O, Kouri M, Papadopoulou E, et al: Osteonecrosis of the jaw related to non-antiresorptive medications: A
systematic review. Support Care Cancer 27:383, 2019
148. King R, Tanna N, Patel V: Medication-related osteonecrosis
of the jaw unrelated to bisphosphonates and denosumab-a
review. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol 127:
289, 2019
149. Sacco R, Shah S, Leeson R, et al: Osteonecrosis and osteomyelitis of the jaw associated with tumour necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) inhibitors: A systematic review. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 58:25, 2020
150. Grbic JT, Black DM, Lyles KW, et al: The incidence of osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients receiving 5 milligrams of zoledronic
acid: Data from the health outcomes and reduced incidence
with zoledronic acid once yearly clinical trials program. J Am
Dent Assoc 141:1365, 2010
151. Cosman F, Crittenden DB, Adachi JD, et al: Romosozumab treatment in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. N Engl J
Med 375:1532, 2016
152. Administration USFaD. Background Document for Meeting of
Advisory Committee for Reproductive Health Drugs and
Drug Safety and Risk Management Advisory Committee. Adelphi, MD, FDA, HHS, 2011
153. Bone HG, Wagman RB, Brandi ML, et al: 10 years of denosumab treatment in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis: Results from the phase 3 randomised FREEDOM
trial and open-label extension. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
5:513, 2017
154. FDA. Briefing Information for the September 9, 2011 Joint
Meeting of the Reproductive Health Drugs Advisory Committee and the Drug Safety and Risk Management Advisory Committee. Adelphi, MD, FDA, HHS, 2011
155. Rutkowski P, Gaston L, Borkowska A, et al: Denosumab treatment of inoperable or locally advanced giant cell tumor of
bone multicenter analysis outside clinical trial. Eur J Surg Oncol 44:1384, 2018
156. Chawla S, Blay JY, Rutkowski P, et al: Denosumab in patients
with giant-cell tumour of bone: A multicentre, open-label,
phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 20:1719, 2019
157. Hennedige AA, Jayasinghe J, Khajeh J, Macfarlane TV: Systematic review on the incidence of bisphosphonate related osteonecrosis of the jaw in children diagnosed with osteogenesis
imperfecta. J Oral Maxillofac Res 4:e1, 2013
158. Duarte NT, Rech BO, Martins IG, et al: Can children be affected
by bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw? A systematic review. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 49:183, 2020
159. Lo JC, O’Ryan FS, Gordon NP, et al: Prevalence of osteonecrosis
of the jaw in patients with oral bisphosphonate exposure. J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 68:243, 2010
160. Aljohani S, Fliefel R, Ihbe J, et al: What is the effect of antiresorptive drugs (ARDs) on the development of medicationrelated osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ) in osteoporosis patients: A systematic review. J Craniomaxillofac Surg 45:1493,
2017
161. Shudo A, Kishimoto H, Takaoka K, Noguchi K: Long-term oral
bisphosphonates delay healing after tooth extraction: A single
institutional prospective study. Osteoporos Int 29:2315, 2018
162. Gaudin E, Seidel L, Bacevic M, et al: Occurrence and risk indicators of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw after
dental extraction: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Clin Periodontol 42:922, 2015
163. Watts NB, Grbic JT, Binkley N, et al: Invasive oral procedures
and events in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis
treated with denosumab for up to 10 Years. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 104:2443, 2019
164. Mozzati M, Arata V, Gallesio G: Tooth extraction in patients on
zoledronic acid therapy. Oral Oncol 48:817, 2012
165. Yamazaki T, Yamori M, Ishizaki T, et al: Increased incidence of
osteonecrosis of the jaw after tooth extraction in patients
treated with bisphosphonates: A cohort study. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 41:1397, 2012

RUGGIERO ET AL
166. Scoletta M, Arata V, Arduino PG, et al: Tooth extractions in intravenous bisphosphonate-treated patients: A refined protocol. J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 71:994, 2013
167. Bodem JP, Kargus S, Eckstein S, et al: Incidence of bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in high-risk patients undergoing surgical tooth extraction. J Craniomaxillofac Surg
43:510, 2015
168. McGowan K, McGowan T, Ivanovski S: Risk factors for medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws: A systematic review.
Oral Dis 24:527, 2018
169. Kyrgidis A, Vahtsevanos K, Koloutsos G, et al: Bisphosphonaterelated osteonecrosis of the jaws: A case-control study of
risk factors in breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 26:4634,
2008
170. Vahtsevanos K, Kyrgidis A, Verrou E, et al: Longitudinal cohort
study of risk factors in cancer patients of bisphosphonaterelated osteonecrosis of the jaw. J Clin Oncol 27:5356, 2009
171. Tsao C, Darby I, Ebeling PR, et al: Oral health risk factors for
bisphosphonate-associated jaw osteonecrosis. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 71:1360, 2013
172. Qi WX, Tang LN, He AN, et al: Risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw
in cancer patients receiving denosumab: A meta-analysis of
seven randomized controlled trials. Int J Clin Oncol 19:403,
2014
173. Ripamonti CI, Maniezzo M, Campa T, et al: Decreased occurrence of osteonecrosis of the jaw after implementation of
dental preventive measures in solid tumour patients with
bone metastases treated with bisphosphonates. The experience of the National Cancer Institute of Milan. Ann Oncol
20:137, 2009
174. Montefusco V, Gay F, Spina F, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis
before dental procedures may reduce the incidence of osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with multiple myeloma treated
with bisphosphonates. Leuk Lymphoma 49:2156, 2008
175. Bantis A, Zissimopoulos A, Sountoulides P, et al: Bisphosphonate-induced osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with bone
metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. Risk factors
and prevention strategies. Tumori 97:479, 2011
176. Kunchur R, Goss AN: The oral health status of patients on oral
bisphosphonates for osteoporosis. Aust Dent J 53:354, 2008
177. Lodi G, Sardella A, Salis A, et al: Tooth extraction in patients taking intravenous bisphosphonates: A preventive protocol and
case series. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 68:107, 2010
178. Mozzati M, Gallesio G, Arata V, et al: Platelet-rich therapies in
the treatment of intravenous bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw: A report of 32 cases. Oral Oncol 48:469, 2012
179. Ferlito S, Puzzo S, Liardo C: Preventive protocol for tooth extractions in patients treated with zoledronate: A case series. J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 69:e1, 2011
180. Schubert M, Klatte I, Linek W, et al: The saxon bisphosphonate
register - therapy and prevention of bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws. Oral Oncol 48:349, 2012
181. Bonacina R, Mariani U, Villa F, Villa A: Preventive strategies and
clinical implications for bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis
of the jaw: A review of 282 patients. J Can Dent Assoc 77:b147,
2011
182. Khan AA, Morrison A, Hanley DA, et al: International Task
Force on Osteonecrosis of the Jaw. Diagnosis and management
of osteonecrosis of the jaw: a systematic review and international consensus. J Bone Miner Res 30:3, 2015
183. Japanese Allied Committee on Osteonecrosis of the
JawYoneda T, Hagino H, Sugimoto T, et al: Antiresorptive
agent-related osteonecrosis of the jaw: Position paper 2017
of the Japanese Allied Committee on osteonecrosis of the
jaw. J Bone Miner Metab 35:6, 2017
184. Aparecida Cariolatto F, Carelli J, de Campos Moreira T, et al:
Recommendations for the prevention of bisphosphonaterelated osteonecrosis of the jaw: A systematic review. J Evid
Based Dent Pract 18:142, 2018
185. Beth-Tasdogan NH, Mayer B, Hussein H, Zolk O: Interventions
for managing medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD012432, 2017
186. Mucke T, Deppe H, Hein J, et al: Prevention of bisphosphonaterelated osteonecrosis of the jaws in patients with prostate can-

941
cer treated with zoledronic acid - a prospective study over 6
years. J Craniomaxillofac Surg 44:1689, 2016
187. Smidt-Hansen T, Folkmar TB, Fode K, et al: Combination of zoledronic Acid and targeted therapy is active but may induce osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 71:1532, 2013
188. Sivolella S, Lumachi F, Stellini E, Favero L: Denosumab and antiangiogenetic drug-related osteonecrosis of the jaw: An uncommon but potentially severe disease. Anticancer Res 33:1793,
2013
189. Patel V, McLeod NM, Rogers SN, Brennan PA: Bisphosphonate
osteonecrosis of the jaw–a literature review of UK policies
versus international policies on bisphosphonates, risk factors
and prevention. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 49:251, 2011
190. Hellstein JW, Adler RA, Edwards B, Ristic H, American Dental
Association Council on scientific Affairs Expert Panel on antiresorptive Agents: Managing the care of patients receiving antiresorptive therapy for prevention and treatment of osteoporosis:
Executive summary of recommendations from the American
Dental Association Council on scientific Affairs. J Am Dent Assoc 142:1243, 2011
191. Atalay B, Yalcin S, Emes Y, et al: Bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis: Laser-assisted surgical treatment or conventional surgery? Lasers Med Sci 26:815, 2011
192. Guarneri V, Miles D, Robert N, et al: Bevacizumab and osteonecrosis of the jaw: Incidence and association with bisphosphonate therapy in three large prospective trials in advanced
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 122:181, 2010
193. Edwards BJ, Hellstein JW, Jacobsen PL, et al: American Dental
Association Council on scientific Affairs Expert Panel on bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the Jaw: Updated
recommendations for managing the care of patients receiving
oral bisphosphonate therapy: An advisory statement from the
American Dental Association Council on scientific Affairs. J
Am Dent Assoc 139:1674, 2008
194. de-Freitas NR, Lima LB, de-Moura MB, et al: Bisphosphonate
treatment and dental implants: A systematic review. Med Oral
Patol Oral Cir Bucal 21:e644, 2016
195. de Molon RS, Cheong S, Bezouglaia O, et al: Spontaneous osteonecrosis of the jaws in the maxilla of mice on antiresorptive
treatment: A novel ONJ mouse model. Bone 68:11, 2014
196. Messer JG, Jiron JM, Mendieta Calle JL, et al: Zoledronate treatment duration is linked to bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw prevalence in rice rats with generalized
periodontitis. Oral Dis 25:1116, 2019
197. Hinchy NV, Jayaprakash V, Rossitto RA, et al: Osteonecrosis of
the jaw - prevention and treatment strategies for oral health
professionals. Oral Oncol 49:878, 2013
198. Khan AA, Morrison A, Kendler DL, et al: International task
Force on osteonecrosis of the Jaw: Case-based review of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) and application of the international
recommendations for management from the international
task Force on ONJ. J Clin Densitom 20:8, 2017
199. Ottesen C, Schiodt M, Gotfredsen K: Efficacy of a high-dose
antiresorptive drug holiday to reduce the risk of medicationrelated osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ): A systematic review.
Heliyon 6:e03795, 2020
200. Anastasilakis AD, Polyzos SA, Makras P, et al: Clinical features of
24 patients with rebound-associated vertebral fractures after
denosumab discontinuation: Systematic review and additional
cases. J Bone Miner Res 32:1291, 2017
201. Cummings SR, Ferrari S, Eastell R, et al: Vertebral fractures after
discontinuation of denosumab: A post Hoc analysis of the randomized placebo-controlled FREEDOM trial and its extension. J
Bone Miner Res 33:190, 2018
202. Tsourdi E, Langdahl B, Cohen-Solal M, et al: Discontinuation of
denosumab therapy for osteoporosis: A systematic review and
position statement by ECTS. Bone 105:11, 2017
203. Lorenzo-Pouso AI, Perez-Sayans M, Gonzalez-Palanca S, et al:
Biomarkers to predict the onset of biphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw: A systematic review. Med Oral Patol
Oral Cir Bucal 24:e26, 2019
204. Musolino C, Oteri G, Allegra A, et al: Altered microRNA expression profile in the peripheral lymphoid compartment of

942
multiple myeloma patients with bisphosphonate-induced osteonecrosis of the jaw. Ann Hematol 97:1259, 2018
205. Yang R, Tao Y, Wang C, et al: Circulating microRNA Panel as a
novel biomarker to Diagnose bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw. Int J Med Sci 15:1694, 2018
206. Durie BG, Katz M, Crowley J: Osteonecrosis of the jaw and bisphosphonates. N Engl J Med 353:99, 2005
207. Hoff AO, Toth BB, Altundag K, et al: Frequency and risk factors
associated with osteonecrosis of the jaw in cancer patients
treated with intravenous bisphosphonates. J Bone Miner Res
23:826, 2008
208. Dimopoulos MA, Kastritis E, Bamia C, et al: Reduction of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) after implementation of preventive
measures in patients with multiple myeloma treated with zoledronic acid. Ann Oncol 20:117, 2009
209. Yarom N, Shapiro CL, Peterson DE, et al: Medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw: MASCC/ISOO/ASCO clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Oncol 37:2270, 2019
210. Lewiecki EM, Wright NC, Curtis JR, et al: Hip fracture trends in
the United States, 2002 to 2015. Osteoporos Int 29:717, 2018
211. Guzon-Illescas O, Perez Fernandez E, Crespi Villarias N, et al:
Mortality after osteoporotic hip fracture: Incidence, trends,
and associated factors. J Orthop Surg Res 14:203, 2019
212. McCauley LK: Clinical recommendations for prevention of secondary fractures in patients with osteoporosis: Implications for
dental care. J Am Dent Assoc 151:311, 2020
213. Moinzadeh AT, Shemesh H, Neirynck NA, et al: Bisphosphonates and their clinical implications in endodontic therapy.
Int Endod J 46:391, 2013
214. Gelazius R, Poskevicius L, Sakavicius D, et al: Dental implant
placement in patients on bisphosphonate therapy: A systematic review. J Oral Maxillofac Res 9:e2, 2018
215. Holzinger D, Seemann R, Matoni N, et al: Effect of dental implants on bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws. J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 72:1937.e1, 2014
216. Granate-Marques A, Polis-Yanes C, Seminario-Amez M, et al:
Medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw associated with
implant and regenerative treatments: Systematic review. Med
Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal 24:e195, 2019
217. Stavropoulos A, Bertl K, Pietschmann P, Pandis N, Schiødt M,
Klinge: The effect of antiresorptive drugs on implant therapy:
Systematic review and meta-analysis. B Clin Oral Implants Res
18(29 Suppl):54–92, 2018
218. Ryu JI, Kim HY, Kwon YD: Is implant surgery a risk factor for
osteonecrosis of the jaw in older adult patients with osteoporosis? A national cohort propensity score-matched study. Clin
Oral Implants Res 32:437, 2021
219. Giovannacci I, Meleti M, Manfredi M, et al: Medication-related
osteonecrosis of the jaw around dental implants: Implant surgery-triggered or implant presence-triggered osteonecrosis? J
Craniofac Surg 27:697, 2016
220. Kwon TG, Lee CO, Park JW, et al: Osteonecrosis associated
with dental implants in patients undergoing bisphosphonate
treatment. Clin Oral Implants Res 25:632, 2014
221. Pogrel MA, Ruggiero SL: Previously successful dental implants
can fail when patients commence anti-resorptive therapy-a
case series. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 47:220, 2018
222. Walton K, Grogan TR, Eshaghzadeh E, et al: Medication related
osteonecrosis of the jaw in osteoporotic vs oncologic patients quantifying radiographic appearance and relationship to clinical findings. Dentomaxillofac Radiol 48:20180128, 2019
223. Coropciuc RG, Grisar K, Aerden T, et al: Medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in oncological patients with skeletal metastases: Conservative treatment is effective up to stage 2. Br J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 55:787, 2017
224. Soundia A, Hadaya D, Mallya SM, Aghaloo TL, Tetradis S: Radiographic predictors of bone exposure in patients with stage
0 medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws. Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol 126(6), 2018
225. Varoni EM, Lombardi N, Villa G, et al: Conservative management of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws (MRONJ):
A retrospective cohort study. Antibiotics (Basel) 10, 2021
226. Ripamonti CI, Cislaghi E, Mariani L, Maniezzo M: Efficacy and
safety of medical ozone (O(3)) delivered in oil suspension ap-

AAOMS’ POSITION PAPER ON MRONJ—2022 UPDATE
plications for the treatment of osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with bone metastases treated with bisphosphonates:
Preliminary results of a phase I-II study. Oral Oncol 47:185,
2011
227. Freiberger JJ, Padilla-Burgos R, McGraw T, et al: What is the role
of hyperbaric oxygen in the management of bisphosphonaterelated osteonecrosis of the jaw: A randomized controlled trial
of hyperbaric oxygen as an adjunct to surgery and antibiotics. J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 70:1573, 2012
228. Epstein MS, Wicknick FW, Epstein JB, et al: Management of bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis: Pentoxifylline and
tocopherol in addition to antimicrobial therapy. An initial
case series. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
110:593, 2010
229. Morishita K, Yamada SI, Kawakita A, et al: Treatment outcomes
of adjunctive teriparatide therapy for medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ): A multicenter retrospective analysis in Japan. J Orthop Sci 25:1079, 2020
230. Sim IW, Borromeo GL, Tsao C, et al: Teriparatide promotes
bone healing in medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw:
A placebo-controlled, randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 38:2971,
2020
231. Carlson ER, Basile JD: The role of surgical resection in the management of bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws. J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 67:85, 2009
232. Abu-Id MH, Warnke PH, Gottschalk J, et al: ‘ Bisphossy jaws’ high and low risk factors for bisphosphonate-induced osteonecrosis of the jaw. J Craniomaxillofac Surg 36:95, 2008
233. Wutzl A, Biedermann E, Wanschitz F, et al: Treatment results of
bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws. Head Neck
30:1224, 2008
234. Stanton DC, Balasanian E: Outcome of surgical management of
bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws: Review of
33 surgical cases. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 67:943, 2009
235. Wilde F, Heufelder M, Winter K, et al: The role of surgical therapy in the management of intravenous bisphosphonatesrelated osteonecrosis of the jaw. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 111:153, 2011
236. Adornato MC, Morcos I, Rozanski J: The treatment of bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaws with bone
resection and autologous platelet-derived growth factors. J
Am Dent Assoc 138:971, 2007
237. Williamson R: Surgical management of bisphosphonate
induced osteonecrosis of the jaws. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg
39:251, 2010
238. Carlson ER: Management of antiresorptive osteonecrosis of the
jaws with primary surgical resection. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 72:
655, 2014
239. Watters AL, Hansen HJ, Williams T, et al: Intravenous bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw: Long-term
follow-up of 109 patients. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol 115:192, 2013
240. Ristow O, Ruckschloss T, Muller M, et al: Is the conservative
non-surgical management of medication-related osteonecrosis
of the jaw an appropriate treatment option for early stages? A
long-term single-center cohort study. J Craniomaxillofac Surg
47:491, 2019
241. Carlson ER, Schlott BJ: Anti-resorptive osteonecrosis of the
jaws. Facts forgotten, questions answered, lessons learned.
Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am 26:171, 2014
242. Klingelhoffer C, Zeman F, Meier J, et al: Evaluation of surgical
outcome and influencing risk factors in patients with medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws. J Craniomaxillofac
Surg 44:1694, 2016
243. Nisi M, La Ferla F, Karapetsa D, et al: Conservative surgical management of patients with bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws: A series of 120 patients. Br J Oral Maxillofac
Surg 54:930, 2016
244. Park H, Copeland C, Henry S, Barbul A: Complex wounds and
their management. Surg Clin North Am 90:1181, 2010
245. Giudice A, Barone S, Diodati F, et al: Can surgical management
improve resolution of medication-related osteonecrosis of the
jaw at early stages? A prospective cohort study. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 78:1986, 2020

RUGGIERO ET AL
246. Rachner TD, Coleman R, Hadji P, Hofbauer LC: Individualized bone-protective management in long-term cancer
survivors with bone metastases. J Bone Miner Res 36:
1906, 2021
247. Gnant M, Mlineritsch B, Stoeger H, et al: Colorectal cancer
study group VA: Zoledronic acid combined with adjuvant endocrine therapy of tamoxifen versus anastrozol plus ovarian func-

943
tion suppression in premenopausal early breast cancer: Final
analysis of the Austrian breast and Colorectal cancer study
group trial 12. Ann Oncol 26:313, 2015
248. Yang YL, Xiang ZJ, Yang JH, et al: The incidence and relative
risk of adverse events in patients treated with bisphosphonate
therapy for breast cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ther Adv Med Oncol June 9:11, 2019

